FORUM – SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF MENTAL HEALTH AND DISORDER, AND EFFECTIVE
PREVENTION STRATEGIES

The social determinants of mental health and disorder: evidence,
prevention and recommendations
James B. Kirkbride1, Deidre M. Anglin2,3, Ian Colman4, Jennifer Dykxhoorn1, Peter B. Jones5,6, Praveetha Patalay7,8, Alexandra Pitman1,9,
Emma Soneson10, Thomas Steare7, Talen Wright1, Siân Lowri Griffiths11
1

Division of Psychiatry, University College London, London, UK; 2City College, City University of New York, New York, NY, USA; 3Graduate Center, City University of New York, New
York, NY, USA; 4School of Epidemiology and Public Health, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada; 5Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK; 6Cambridgeshire & Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, UK; 7Medical Research Council Unit for Lifelong Health and Ageing, University College London, London, UK; 8Centre
for Longitudinal Studies, Social Research Institute, University College London, London, UK; 9Camden and Islington NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK; 10Department of Psychiatry,
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK; 11Institute for Mental Health, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK

People exposed to more unfavourable social circumstances are more vulnerable to poor mental health over their life course, in ways that are often de­ter­
mined by structural factors which generate and perpetuate intergenerational cycles of disadvantage and poor health. Addressing these challenges is an
imperative matter of social justice. In this paper we provide a roadmap to address the social determinants that cause mental ill health. Relying as far
as possible on high-quality evidence, we first map out the literature that supports a causal link between social determinants and later mental health
outcomes. Given the breadth of this topic, we focus on the most pervasive social determinants across the life course, and those that are common across
major mental disorders. We draw primarily on the available evidence from the Global North, acknowledging that other global contexts will face both
similar and unique sets of social determinants that will require equitable attention. Much of our evidence focuses on mental health in groups who are
marginalized, and thus often exposed to a multitude of intersecting social risk factors. These groups include refugees, asylum seekers and displaced per­
sons, as well as ethnoracial minoritized groups; lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and queer (LGBTQ+) groups; and those living in poverty. We then
introduce a preventive framework for conceptualizing the link between social determinants and mental health and disorder, which can guide much
needed primary prevention strategies capable of reducing inequalities and improving population mental health. Following this, we provide a review of
the evidence concerning candidate preventive strategies to intervene on social determinants of mental health. These interventions fall broadly within the
scope of universal, selected and indicated primary prevention strategies, but we also briefly review important secondary and tertiary strategies to pro­
mote recovery in those with existing mental disorders. Finally, we provide seven key recommendations, framed around social justice, which constitute a
roadmap for action in research, policy and public health. Adoption of these recommendations would provide an opportunity to advance efforts to inter­
vene on modifiable social determinants that affect population mental health.
Key words: Mental health, mental disorder, social determinants, social risk factors, prevention, marginalized groups, population mental health,
social justice
(World Psychiatry 2024;23:58–90)

Social determinants of health represent the most modifiable
set of targets for intervention currently available to prevent the on­
set of mental health problems and disorders, and to promote posi­
tive mental health in our populations. Social determinants of men­
tal health encompass the set of structural conditions to which peo­
ple are exposed across the life course, from conception to death,
which affect individual mental health outcomes, and contribute to
mental health disparities within and between populations. These
structural conditions include factors such as income, employment,
socioeconomic status, education, food security, housing, social
support, discrimination, childhood adversity, as well as the neigh­
bourhood social and physical conditions in which people live, and
the ability to access acceptable and affordable health care. Impor­
tantly, our chances of being exposed to protective or harmful so­
cial determinants of (mental) health are “shaped by the distribu­
tion of money, power and resources at global, national and local
levels, which are themselves influenced by policy choices”1. Such
determinants are therefore not randomly or benignly distributed
within or between populations, but are manifested by systems and
institutions of power that often produce and reproduce intergener­
ational inequities in people’s opportunities to realize safe, secure,
prosperous and healthy lives.

58

There is now compelling evidence that the risk of developing
any mental health condition is inextricably linked to our life cir­
cumstances2, meaning that a higher burden of population-level
psychiatric morbidity is disproportionately experienced by those
closer to the margins of our societies. Since poor mental health can
be the invisible hand that suppresses life chances, including both
how long we live3 and the quality of years lived4, improving popu­
lation mental health by designing effective prevention strategies
that inter­­vene on modifiable social risk factors should be seen as a
central issue of social justice5.
We stand at a threshold moment not only in understanding the
potential causal role of modifiable social determinants in the on­
set (or exacerbation) of mental health problems, but also in defin­
ing our response to them through effective prevention strategies
that reduce inequities in the burden of psychiatric morbidity ex­
perienced between and within different populations. Arguably,
the last two decades have brought about some progress in our
biomedical understanding of psychiatric disorders, while investi­
gating the importance of psychosocial factors in causing mental
disorder has remained a peripheral focus for scientific discovery
and clinical psychiatry. We have expanded our knowledge about
the immutable, overlapping (pleiotropic) and polygenic bases of

World Psychiatry 23:1 - February 2024

psychiatric disorders that can help explain why some individuals
are more at risk of a diverse array of psychopathologies than oth­
ers6. We have also achieved a better understanding of how com­
plex the neurobiology of different psychiatric conditions is likely
to be7, including depression, psychosis and bipolar disorder. This
progress has, however, simultaneously exposed limitations in our
ability to translate the acquired knowledge into effective clinical
targets to prevent or alleviate symptoms of mental distress. The
promise of personalized prediction and treatment remains out
of reach in routine clinical practice8. Frontline pharmacological
treatments for depression, anxiety, psychosis and bipolar disorder
have remained largely unchanged since they were first developed
in the 20th century9; treatment resistance affects 20-60% of our pa­
tients10; and the pharmaceutical industry has largely withdrawn
from psychiatric drug discovery in the last 20 years11.
These last two decades have simultaneously witnessed at least
two seismic transformations in the mental health landscape. First,
unprecedented increases in public awareness and advocacy about
mental health, well-being and illness, albeit concentrated in the
Global North, have raised political pressure on institutions and
governments to act to address the global burden of psychiatric
morbidity2. Such has been the transformation that promoting men­­
tal health and well-being is now identified as a specific outcome
in the United Nations (UN) Sustainable Development Goals​12, a-­
long­side targets to tackle various social determinants of health – in­­
clud­ing poverty, inequality, gender equality, and social justice – by
2030. The World Health Organization (WHO) also recognizes the
urgent need to address how our environments affect mental health.
In the recent World Mental Health Report2, T. Ghebreyesus, the WHO
Director-General, reaffirmed the Organization’s com­mitment in
“transforming the environments that influence our mental health”
to promote mental well-being and prevent mental disorder.
Second, longitudinal declines in public stigma and more pos­
itive attitudes towards major psychiatric conditions such as de­
pression – particularly in so-called Millennial and Gen Z gen­
erations13,14 – have been paralleled by sustained increases in the
number of people seeking help for mental health issues over the
last 20 years. In some contexts, this has placed overwhelming
pressure on clinical services tasked with providing primary, sec­
ondary and tertiary treatment for mental health conditions, with
evidence globally that economic investment in mental health
service provision continues to fall far short of need for care2. For
example, in England, a 54% increase in referrals to public mental
health services from 2016 to 2022 was accompanied by a mere
10.9% real-terms increase in service funding15,16, highlighting the
growing treatment gap in population mental health. This gap has
been reported globally for depression17 and psychosis2, and is par­
ticularly high in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs)18.
The increased need for mental health care over the last two de­
cades is not randomly distributed within populations, but follows
clearly the social, demographic and economic lines along which ex­
periences of poor mental health and receipt of mental health care
are inequitably distributed2.
Nowhere is this more evident than in the case of children and
young people. Given that adolescence represents a critical period

World Psychiatry 23:1 - February 2024

of neural, psychological, behavioural and social development, it is
perhaps no surprise that so many mental health problems emerge
for the first time during this period. A recent systematic review of
the pre-pandemic literature estimated that the onset of around
one third, half and two thirds of any mental disorder will have al­
ready occurred by ages 14, 18 and 25, respectively19. In the US, the
proportion of university students – typically aged 18-22 years –
who reported having been treated for mental health problems has
risen from 19% in 2007 to 34% in 201720. A rapid increase in selfreported depressive symptoms amongst younger adolescents in
the US since 2012 has also been reported, peaking in 2018 (the last
date of available survey data)21. These are not isolated findings.
Further research from the US22, Canada23, Europe24, France25, Ice­
land26 and Australia27,28 all suggest that rates of depression, anxi­
ety, self-harm, eating disorders, attention-deficit/hyperactivity dis­
order (ADHD) and suicide have risen rapidly amongst teenagers
since 201029, particularly in females26,27,30,31. By contrast, there is
some evidence that the prevalence of alcohol and drug use disor­
ders24,32 and behaviours33 has decreased over this period.
Observed changes in the prevalence of mental health prob­
lems in children and young people have been attributed to both
period21 and cohort22 effects. While the COVID-19 pandemic – a
textbook period effect – appears to have had only minimal im­
pact on long-term mental health in the general population34,35,
impacts on children and young people, who have often borne the
brunt of restrictive lockdown policies, are more pronounced25,34,35.
For example, in England, the number of people less than 18 years
old accessing public mental health services in the previous 12
months increased by 20.4% between the start of the pandemic and
July 202215. These patterns have been observed in several differ­
ent countries34,35, and extend to suicidal outcomes, particularly
amongst girls34. Inequalities in poor mental health following the
COVID-19 pandemic have also been reported for women36-38, lowincome households36, and several groups minoritized by race and
ethnicity38, gender identity and sexual orientation39, or migrant
status40.
Other shocks (i.e., food, energy and economic crises, global con­­
flicts, racial injustice), in addition to ongoing climate change, also
contribute to the inequitable distribution of mental health and dis­
order in our populations. These shocks affect people’s freedom of
movement, social connectedness, and levels of isolation and lone­
liness. They influence people’s economic precarity through impacts
on employment, income, education, food and housing security.
They affect people’s agency and autonomy by threat to life, liveli­
hood and civil liberties, whether via experiences of interpersonal,
institutional or systematic racism, or displacement through conflict
and violence, political instability, or climate-related events. Most
inescapably, these acute shocks belie a more chronic, pervasive ex­­­­
posure to negative social determinants which erode people’s oppor­­
tunities to sustain good mental health, recover from poor mental
health, and prevent illness in the future. Repeated exposure to these
determinants can create cycles of intergenerational disadvantage,
which affect individual, familial and area-level in­equal­ities in men­
tal health2,41.
At this critical juncture, we argue for the need to fully integrate

59

a social determinants perspective into the biopsychosocial model
of mental health and illness. This requires establishing the extent to
which various social determinants are causally implicated in pro­
ducing poor mental health, and generating inequalities in risk for
mental disorders. It also involves understanding the mechanisms
and pathways through which these outcomes arise. Armed with
this knowledge, we will be in a stronger position to fund, develop,
test and implement evidence-based prevention strategies tackling
the social determinants of mental health that shift the popula­
tion-level expression of mental disorders. In turn, this can reduce
gross inequities in the mental, physical and social outcomes that
arise as a result of poor mental health. Such public mental health
strategies should sit alongside existing evidence-based strategies in clinical psychiatry that have proved effective in treating indi­­­
viduals.
In this paper, we provide a roadmap towards this ambitious
but necessary revolution. We first review the evidence that exists
to support a causal association between key social determinants
and mental health and disorder. We focus on those determinants
which may have broad effects on several major mental disorders
globally, and/or which may be highly prevalent in society, and
thus have the potential to offer the biggest gains for public mental
health prevention. These include social determinants that occur at
the individual or family level (including socioeconomic disadvan­
tage, discrimination, isolation and loneliness, early life adversities,
childhood traumas), and those in the wider social environment
(including neighbourhood disadvantage, social capital, the physi­
cal environment, and climate change). Our review pays special
attention to inequalities experienced by women; lesbian, gay, bi­
sexual, transgender and queer (LGBTQ+) people; migrants and
ethnoracial minoritized groups. Throughout, we cite the strongest
quantitative evidence, where available, and acknowledge any gaps
in knowledge. One limitation of this approach is that the major­
ity of the evidence we draw from – though by no means alle.g.,42 –
comes from high-income countries (HICs) in the Global North.
Redressing the inequitable production of knowledge in this field
is beyond the scope of our review, but provides a direct challenge
to make global progress on the UN Sustainable Development Goal
for mental health12,43. Where available, we highlight evidence col­
lected in the Global South, but recognize that different contexts
will also face unique social determinants of mental health that re­
quire dedicated attention.
We then introduce a preventive framework for conceptualiz­
ing how such social determinants affect the expression of mental
health and disorder at the population level, and how this under­
standing can ground and guide prevention strategies to improve
public mental health. In this framework, we introduce the funda­
mental idea of treating whole populations, which should sit along­
side prevailing models of individual clinical care in psychiatry.
Treatments here, broadly defined, may include universal, selec­
tive or indicated primary prevention strategies that intervene on
social determinants of health aiming to affect the population-level
expression of mental health and illness, as well as secondary and
tertiary prevention strategies to help those with existing mental
health problems. Using this framework, we then review the current

60

strength of evidence on the efficacy and effectiveness of a (nonexhaustive) set of universal, selective and indicated strategies that
intervene on social determinants for the prevention and allevia­
tion of mental distress. In the final section of the paper, drawing to­
gether current evidence, we provide a set of seven recommenda­
tions for action, as a roadmap for improving population mental
health and reducing inequities in mental health and disorder.

SOCIAL DETERMINANTS THAT IMPACT MENTAL
HEALTH AND DISORDER: THE EVIDENCE
Social determinants at the individual level
Socioeconomic disadvantage
Socioeconomic disadvantage is a fundamental determinant of
mental health outcomes over the life course44-46. Strong socioeco­
nomic gradients have been observed for an array of mental health
outcomes in HIC45 and LMIC settings42. Socioeconomic disadvan­
tage can be operationalized in several ways, and is a multifaceted
construct encompassing different dimensions, including educa­
tion47,48, finance49,50, occupation51-53, and living standards54,55. All
these dimensions have been associated with mental health and
disorder, and social inequalities in mental health may arise from
a series of interrelated structural and cultural processes operating
in society.
According to structural explanations, social stratification cre­
ates unequal access to resources – such as wealth and knowledge –
that help individuals avoid exposure to harmful stressors46. Higher
levels of wealth and income enable access to key determinants of
positive mental health, including adequate and safe housing55,
sufficient food security54, and effective health care. Income losses
appear to have a far greater impact on mental health than income
gains49, with further financial stressors such as income volatility,
perceived job insecurity and moving into debt all linked to worsen­
ing mental health50,56,57. Poor mental health itself can also impact
earnings and contribute to financial stress, meaning that the rela­
tionship between socioeconomic disadvantage and mental health
is likely to be bi-directional58. Indeed, while there is a long-stand­
ing debate about the so-called “social causation” and “social drift”
theories of mental disorders46, recognizing the bi-directional and
cyclical relationship between socioeconomic disadvantage and
mental health is likely to be vital for promoting prevention strate­
gies that interrupt the intergenerational transmission of environ­
mental risks for mental disorders2. Since socioeconomic disadvan­
tage is both a risk factor for, and a consequence of, mental disor­
ders, establishing key periods over the life course to intervene is a
critical step towards effective prevention. We note here the need
for stronger causal inference methods to address these challenges
in observational studies.
Early life exposure to socioeconomic disadvantage may be par­
ticularly harmful for later mental health. For example, in a sys­
tematic review of evidence in children and adolescents59, 52 of
55 studies (mostly from HICs), including 25 longitudinal ones,

World Psychiatry 23:1 - February 2024

reported an inverse association of mental health problems with
socioeconomic position. Children growing up in socioeconomic
disadvantage were 2-3 times more likely to experience mental
health problems than their non-disadvantaged peers, with risk as­
sociated with both duration and severity of exposure. A systematic
review reported similar associations with respect to ADHD60. An
inverse relationship between parental income during a child’s up­
bringing and later schizophrenia risk has been also found in Den­
mark61,62, independent of parental mental health and education.
Birth cohort evidence from the UK also suggests that children
growing up or transitioning into poverty are more likely to experi­
ence mental health problems by age 11, independent of maternal
mental health63. Finally, there is also systematic review evidence
from LMICs that supports (mostly cross-sectional, but extending
to longitudinal) associations between poverty and depression in
adulthood42.
If causal, early life exposure to socioeconomic disadvantage
may increase risk of mental health problems through several differ­
ent mechanisms, based on potential biological, psychological and
social pathways64. In LMIC settings, a systematic review conclud­
ed that education, food insecurity, socioeconomic position and
financial stress had more consistent effects on risk for common
mental disorders than income and employment42. Families lack­
ing financial resources are less likely to have their basic needs met,
including adequate nutrition, which prenatally has been shown to
increase the risk of some psychiatric disorders, including schizo­
phrenia, later in life (see below)65. Ongoing familial socioeconomic
disadvantage is also likely to contribute to chronic stress for parents,
which may affect parenting behaviours and the stability of fam­ily­
environments, and may also result in fewer longer-term education­­
al and employment opportunities for children. Mental health
inequal­ities according to education level have been seen across
the lifespan. Leaving school at a younger age, fewer years in for­
mal education, and having a lower level of education are each as­
sociated with poorer future mental health and increased risk of
suicide48,66. Education is likely to impact mental health through a
variety of means, such as determining one’s future social status and
income, although these associations are likely to be partially due
to confounding by early-life factors such as childhood adversity67.

Early life adversity
There is strong evidence that several early life (defined here as
prenatal and perinatal) adversities – including maternal stress,
obstetric complications, and malnutrition – can have profound
effects on mental health and disorder decades later68. These events
do not affect all people equally, making them strongly socially de­
termined risk factors for offspring mental health. For example, pa­
rental socioeconomic status and experiences of income inequal­
ity are associated with adverse birth outcomes69. Furthermore,
in the US, there is consistent evidence of racial/ethnic disparities
in adverse maternal and neonatal outcomes (including preterm
birth, low birthweight and infant mortality) and receipt of prenatal

World Psychiatry 23:1 - February 2024

care70, all of which are higher for Black, Hispanic and Indigenous
groups than non-Hispanic White and Asian groups. These dispar­
ities are hypothesized to arise through structural racism that oper­
ates on a number of levels to affect “a woman’s knowledge of pre­
natal care (individual); the amount of support she receives from
her family, friends, and community (social); experiences with rac­
ism and other social and environmental stressors (social); the way
she is treated by her care provider (institutional); and the policies
and practices of her insurer (systemic)”70, p.124.
There is good evidence that exposure to prenatal maternal
stressors – including financial stress and relationship difficulties
– is associated with increased risk of many (though not all) off­
spring behavioural and mental health outcomes, including neuro­
cognitive development71, negative affectivity71, externalizing and
internalizing problems in childhood71, autistic traits71, borderline
personality disorder71, anxiety71, depression71,72, and psychosis68.
Nevertheless, this association has not been universally observed.
For example, a systematic review on ADHD and autism spectrum
disorder found that evidence was limited to low-quality case-control
studies, raising doubts about the likelihood of a causal association
73
.
Prenatal malnutrition following famine exposure has also been
strongly associated with risk of psychotic disorders65, notwith­
standing similar issues around causality. A systematic review also
found evidence to support a protective effect of prenatal multivita­
min supplementation on autism spectrum disorder74, but this was
restricted to high-quality studies. Surprisingly few studies have ex­
amined the association between prenatal nutrition and common
mental disorders, with no systematic review available, although
some longitudinal evidence exists for childhood mood and be­
havioural outcomes75-77, with associations persisting after adjust­
ment for maternal perinatal mental health, prenatal smoking and
alcohol use. Early life vitamin D deficiency has also been proposed
as an explanation for higher risk of various psychiatric disorders78,
but recent causally-informed evidence does not support this for
depression79-81, schizophrenia82 and Alzheimer’s disease81.
Understanding the causal mechanisms through which any pre­
natal exposure may affect offspring mental health remains a criti­
cal objective for psychiatric epidemiology. These associations may
be particularly vulnerable to unobserved confounding and se­
lection effects, most importantly by maternal mental health and
behaviour. Cyclical relationships between poor perinatal men­
tal health, social adversity, maternal stress, maternal behaviour
(in­cluding alcohol and substance use), maternal care and prena­
tal nutrition83 may lead to a sociodevelopmental cascade that in­­
creases exposure to adverse child outcomes (all of which have been
associated with risk of mental disorders), including early life infec­
tions (with a stronger relationship between some infections and
psychosis68 rather than depression84), obstetric complications68,85,
altered neurodevelopment86, childhood adversities87, and behav­
ioural and mental health difficulties88. If proven, this would warrant
public mental health strategies focused on improving prenatal ma­
ternal, parental and familial conditions as an intervention strategy
that could benefit multiple parent-child outcomes.

61

Childhood adversity

Migration

Childhood adversity is an especially well-characterized social
determinant of mental ill health. Whilst no consensus definition
exists, McLaughlin defines these adversities as “experiences that
are likely to require significant adaptation by an average child
and that represent a deviation from the expectable environment”​
89, p.363
. To date, much research has focused on a “core set” of
­ad­versities that includes child maltreatment (i.e., physical, sexual
or emotional abuse; neglect; exposure to domestic violence) and
household dysfunction (e.g., substance use, mental ill health, or
incarceration of a parent or other household member; paren­
tal separation or divorce). In a seminal study on these adverse
childhood experiences90, they were found to be associated with
a 4- to 12-fold increased risk of depression, suicide attempt and
substance abuse. Increasingly, the conceptualization of childhood
adversity has expanded to include interpersonal adversities oc­
curring outside of the home environment (e.g., bullying victimi­
zation)91.
Experience of childhood adversity is unfortunately common​
89,92,93
. For example, the World Mental Health Surveys estimate
that around two in five individuals have experienced at least one
form of childhood adversity94. These experiences are clustered in
patterns that are unequally distributed throughout the popula­
tion95. In particular, greater socioeconomic disadvantage, which
can place increased stress on parents and families96, is one of the
clearest and strongest determinants of exposure to childhood ad­
versities95,97; recent evidence suggests that this may be mediated
by effects on parental mental health97. Children who grow up ex­
periencing more family discord98,99, who are born to adolescent
mothers95, and who grow up in single-parent households99 are
more likely to experience multiple childhood adversities. More­
over, given systemic inequalities in socioeconomic disadvantage,
there is also strong evidence that women, people from ethnora­
cially minoritized backgrounds, and Indigenous populations are
more likely to experience multiple childhood adversities100,101.
Clear and consistent evidence has demonstrated associations
between childhood adversity (both prospectively- and retrospec­
tively-measured) and several poor mental health outcomes in
childhood, adolescence and adulthood, including general psy­
chopathology, depression, anxiety, self-harm, psychosis and sui­
cide95,102-105. If causal, the population-attributable risk proportions
(the percentage of disorder that could hypothetically be prevented
via removal of the exposure) for childhood adversity are substan­
tial, calculated at 28.2% of all psychiatric disorders amongst chil­
dren and adolescents92, and 29.8% amongst adults94.
This epidemiological evidence strongly suggests that approach­
es to reduce childhood adversities and their impact are promis­
ing routes for reducing the incidence of mental disorders in the
population96. Importantly, however, there is still much to learn
a­bout the complex relationship between childhood adversity and
mental disorders. Recent findings from studies pertaining to mea­
surement91,106 and prediction modelling107,108 offer important op­
portunities to support the development and evaluation of policies
and interventions to address this widespread societal problem.

Migrants are exposed to a complex set of social determinants
of mental health. This has resulted in a disproportionate burden
of some mental health problems, in particular psychotic disorders.
Elevated rates of psychotic disorders in migrants were first noted
in 1932 by Ødergaard amongst Norwegian migrants to the US109,
and subsequent research has highlighted the consistency of this
phenomenon amongst many migrant groups and their descen­
dants110, including both economic migrants111 and refugees112,113.
There is also consistent evidence of a high prevalence of post-trau­
matic stress disorders (PTSD) amongst refugees and asylum seek­
ers114.
Whether other psychiatric disorders – including depression,
anxiety, non-psychotic bipolar disorder, and substance use disor­
ders – and suicide are elevated amongst migrant groups is less clear,
with some evidence suggesting that the rates of these conditions
may even be lower among migrants than in the non-migrant ma­
jority population111,115-117. Most studies specifically concerned with
common mental disorders in refugees, asylum seekers or forced
migrants generally lack a comparator, but available evidence sug­
gests that the prevalence of depression and anxiety may be higher
in these displaced groups than in the general population114,118.
Several explanations for these potentially divergent results exist.
These include the possibility of selection effects, so that people
with pre-existing mental health problems do not migrate. These
effects are much less likely to exist amongst displaced persons.
Elevated psychosis rates amongst both economic and refugee mi­
grants may – prima facie – challenge these explanations, but young­
er age-at-migration has been associated with greater psychosis
risk119, meaning that the influence of positive selection would be
weaker amongst those who emigrate at earlier ages.
Other explanations for elevated rates of psychotic disorders in
migrants and their descendants, and of several psychiatric disor­
ders in refugees and asylum seekers, include chronic exposure to
socioeconomic disadvantage and social adversities before, dur­
ing and after index migration120,121. For example, migrant groups
may be exposed to many social, economic, political and environ­
mental conditions that serve as push factors prior to migration
and increase risk of mental health problems. These may include
poverty, lack of employment opportunities, food insecurity, con­
flict, violence, and natural disasters122,123. The act of migrating also
involves displacement and dislocation, which may be traumatic,
compromise personal safety, create uncertainty and stress, and
involve prolonged separation from family124-126, and high levels
of risk to life or personal safety124. For example, between 40 and
90% of asylum seekers report traumatic experiences during mi­
gration118,122,127, including violence, exploitation, and detainment
during the asylum-seeking process128. Finally, adapting to life in a
host country can introduce challenges for migrants and refugees,
including high levels of acculturative stress, exclusion from labour
markets, precarious employment, housing insecurity, and socio­
economic deprivation129,130.
There is strong evidence that the post-migratory environment is
causally related to mental health problems amongst migrants and

62

World Psychiatry 23:1 - February 2024

their descendants131. While lower rates of mood and anxiety disor­
ders have been noted in migrants compared with the host popula­
tion132, rates in children of migrants are similar or elevated com­
pared with the majority population132,133. Risk of psychosis also
remains elevated in children of migrants, and may persevere into
the grandchildren generation134. Post-migratory experiences in­
clude exposure to discrimination and structural racism135-139, and
high levels of social isolation and exclusion135,140,141. It has been
theorized that such experiences lead to psychosocial disempow­
erment142,143, and there is recent evidence that this pathway may
explain inequities in psychosis risk experienced by both migrants
and ethnoracial minoritized groups144. Most people also migrate
with the expectation of finding better opportunities in the host coun­
try145,146, which may potentially affect mental health if they are not
met147. Migrants also face barriers to high-quality, timely and cul­
turally appropriate psychiatric care148-150, affecting recovery from
and long-term consequences of experiencing mental disorder.

Ethnoracial discrimination
Ethnoracial disparities across various mental disorders have
been documented for decades, independent of migrant status,
especially in HICs110. The patterns of disparities across racial and
ethnic categories are complex, with levels of psychological dis­
tress and symptoms of common mental disorders higher in mi­
noritized groups than White groups151, but lower prevalence/
incidence of diagnosed depression, anxiety, or substance use dis­
orders in many ethnoracially minoritized groups152,153. In contrast,
there is more consistent evidence of increased rates of psychotic
symptoms and disorders in ethnoracial minoritized groups, par­
ticularly amongst groups perceived as more socioculturally distant
from the racial or ethnic majority population in HICs144,152. For
those with diagnosed mental disorders, there is strong evidence
that many ethnoracial minoritized groups – and particularly peo­
ple of Black ethnicities – experience more negative pathways into
care and psychiatric treatment154-156, resulting in higher levels of
morbidity157.
Many of these ethnoracial differences in the incidence, course
and treatment of mental disorders have been linked with increased
exposure to racial discrimination and structural racism among mi­
noritized groups144. Socioenvironmental risk factors are thought to
be driven by structural racism – i.e., by interconnected, racially in­
equitable systems (e.g., housing, education, employment, health
care, the legal system) that reinforce each other158 to stigmatize,
discriminate and disempower marginalized people159.
Racial discrimination involves major events such as experi­
encing interpersonal racism, exclusion from labour markets, and
police harassment159,160. These experiences extend to racial micro­
aggressions, which are more subtle everyday expressions of dis­
crimination through being slighted, made to feel inferior, stereo­
typed, and/or invalidated due to race or ethnicity161,162. Racial dis­
crimination has been prospectively associated with poorer mental
health and distress163, common mental disorders164,165, psychotic
disorders166, and risk for conversion to psychosis among those at

World Psychiatry 23:1 - February 2024

high risk167. Racial discrimination is also identified as a reason
why, even among non-poor upwardly mobile Black Americans,
the risk of negative health outcomes is higher than for their poor
White American counterparts168.
Structural racism can also increase exposure to other risk fac­
tors for mental disorders at the individual level. For example, re­
cent research from the Adolescent Brain Cognitive Development
(ABCD) study in the US169 found that Black children were more
likely to be exposed to traumatic events, family conflict and ma­
terial hardship compared with White children. Black children
also had lower brain volumes in key areas associated with men­
tal health problems, including the amygdala, the hippocampus
and prefrontal cortex. These race-related disparities were attenu­
ated after adjustment for exposure to childhood adversities. Data
from the same study indicated that Black and Hispanic children
are more likely to report psychotic-like experiences than White
children, and that this is partially accounted for by experiences
of racial discrimination170. This supports further research from
Europe and Brazil showing that elevated rates of psychotic disor­
ders in several ethnoracially minoritized groups are attenuated to
the null after accounting for experiences of structural inequalities
(socioeconomic disadvantage, poor education, childhood adver­
sity) and psychosocial disempowerment (discrimination, social
exclusion)144. Further research is now required to identify the bio­
psychosocial pathways through which stressors associated with
experiences of minoritization and discrimination shape mental
health outcomes171.

Inequalities experienced by the LGBTQ+ community
Interest in the social determinants of health and mental health
in LGBTQ+ people has surged in recent years. Acceptance and
social inclusion of these people have improved consistently over
recent decades, rising steadily from the late 1970s to the early
2010s172, and show signs of increasing further during the current
decade173. Nonetheless, LGBTQ+ people continue to be exposed
to acts of marginalization and moral panics51,174-176, which can
have harmful effects on mental health51,177,178. Marginalization
occurs through discrimination, stigma, anti-queer and anti-trans
policies, bullying/harassment, and other violence occurring at
both micro-levels (e.g., microaggressions) and macro-levels (e.g.,
denial of human rights and health service access)177,179-183, placing
these people at greater risk of social exclusion and loneliness182.
Minority stress following exposure to these experiences is thought
to be a key process in determining mental health outcomes a­­
mongst LGBTQ+ people184-188.
There is substantial evidence to suggest that experiences of prej­
udice, stigma, discrimination, violence, and assumptions of cisheteronormativity (i.e., the implicit and explicit assumption and
building of society which views everyone as cisgender and het­
erosexual) hold substantial associations with poor mental health
and well-being in LGBTQ+ people across the lifespan178,189-191. Pa­
rental and peer support, the formation of romantic relationships,
and navigating the coming-out process, appear to affect some of

63

the initial mental health outcomes in LGBTQ+ youth192,193. For
those who are supported in these processes, there is evidence of
higher self-esteem and lower depressive symptomatology, com­
pared with people who do not receive such support193,194. Simi­
larly, in recent research, navigating homophobia, biphobia and
transphobia, as well as feeling unable to talk about their experiences
and navigating cis-heteronormativity, all increase the risk of poor
mental health, specifically depression, anxiety and suicidality
192,195,196
. There is some evidence that mental health outcomes are
worse for LGBTQ+ people who experience poverty, or who are from
ethnoracial minoritized backgrounds, highlighting the intersec­
tional ways in which social inequalities affect mental health187.

Sex-based inequalities
The incidence and prevalence of many psychiatric disorders dif­
fer by biological sex. For example, depression and anxiety are ap­
proximately twice as common in women than men197, a pattern
that seems reversed in non-affective psychotic disorders (although
this is most pronounced for first onset in early adulthood)198. Bi­
polar disorder occurs with more uniformity198. The lifetime prev­
alence of externalizing and substance use disorders is higher in
males197, who are also more likely to die by suicide throughout the
world regions199. The extent to which these differences are biologi­
cally and/or socially determined remains unclear for some condi­
tions, as discussed below.
Several potential drivers for sex differences in the incidence/
prevalence of common mental disorders have been proposed, in­
cluding ascertainment biases, family environment, social norms,
social support, hormones and neurotransmitters200. Although
available research is limited, there is some evidence challeng­
ing the notion that these differences are solely biologically deter­
mined200. First, the magnitude of sex differences in common
mental disorders varies substantially between countries201, which
would not be predicted on the basis of biological determinism
alone. Second, there is accumulating evidence for the causal role
of certain gendered social risk factors202. For example, the contexts
in which children grow up and are socialized, alongside differ­
ences in social and cultural norms and behaviours, are important
considerations when trying to understand sex differences in men­
tal health and disorder. Some risk factors are strongly gendered
(i.e., intimate partner violence is more commonly experienced by
women), and preventive efforts to tackle their causes are required
in education, law and wider society203.
Other conditions, including eating disorders and autism spec­
trum disorder, have traditionally exhibited more dramatic sex dif­
ferences in their occurrence, with systematic review evidence that
the prevalence of eating disorders is up to four times greater in ­bio-­
­logical females than males204, a ratio reversed for autism spectrum
disorder205. Recent research on this latter condition has investi­
gated the extent to which these sex differences arise from biases in
case ascertainment and detection205-207. Some evidence suggests
that part of the gap could be due to the validity of diagnostic crite­

64

ria and instruments used to diagnose the disorder, which prioritize
symptoms labelled as male-typic (e.g., overt restricted interests)
over symptoms labelled as female-typic (e.g., internalizing prob­
lems and emotional difficulties)207,208. Likewise, some authors have
questioned whether eating disorders are likely to be underdiag­
nosed in biological males206, partly as a result of gendered social
determinants including stigmatization, trauma and perceptions of
masculinity.
An important consideration in understanding how inequalities
contribute to sex and gender differences in mental health is that
most societies are structured in ways that generally privilege cis­
men over all other genders, with even legal equality being achieved
only in a few countries worldwide209. Nonetheless, the relation­
ship between gender equality and gendered differences in mental
health problems is complex. For example, wider gender gaps in
depression have been observed in countries with higher levels of
gender equality amongst both adults and adolescents201,210. Vari­
ous theories have been proposed to explain this evidence. For ex­
ample, women may experience a mismatch between expectations
of equality and reality211, and/or face the burden of multiple roles
as their involvement in the labour market increases in ways that
are not matched by compensatory increases in men’s involvement
in domestic, childrearing and other domains212. Indeed, in coun­
tries with a dual-earner model, where employment, wage earning,
and domestic and childcare tasks are shared more equitably be­
tween men and women, gender inequality in mental health risks
appears to be smaller213.

Loneliness and social isolation
Interest in loneliness214,215 and social isolation43,215 as social
determinants of mental health and disorder has burgeoned in the
last decade. The distinction between these conditions is important,
and has implications for causal pathways, which have not yet been
well described, as well as for targeted intervention.
While social isolation is an objective measure of the number
of social connections, quantified in terms of social network size
and number of meaningful ties216, loneliness describes the sub­
jective and distressing mismatch between a person’s desired and
perceived quantity and/or quality of social relationships217. It is
therefore possible to have a large number of social contacts but
still experience feelings of loneliness, or vice versa. Transient
experiences of social isolation or loneliness are common after
moving house, migration or bereavement, serving as a prompt to
form friendships, such that loneliness could be viewed as an evo­
lutionary advantage in this context218. However, where chronic
loneliness sets in, as indicated by consistent problems with fos­
tering meaningful relationships219, this is more likely to adversely
impact mental health. Estimates of the prevalence of loneliness
internationally range from 9 to 14% in adolescents, falling to 3-10%
in middle age, and rising again to 5-21% in older adults220. Preva­
lence estimates for social isolation (around 25%) tend to relate to
older adults, and derive from low-quality evidence221.

World Psychiatry 23:1 - February 2024

The majority of studies investigating longitudinal associations be­
tween loneliness or social isolation and mental health have fo­
cused on depression, reporting a longitudinal (and bi-directional
222-224
) association of loneliness with depression onset214, sever­
225
ity and recovery226. Such research estimates that 11-18% of cases
could potentially be prevented if loneliness were eliminated225, pre­
dicated on causality. There is also evidence that loneliness is longi­
tudinally (and bi-directionally227) associated with anxiety214, as well
as with suicide attempt228. Both social isolation and loneliness are
also associated with suicide among men229. In children, whose men­­­­
tal health and well-being were a particular concern in periods of
social restriction during the COVID-19 pandemic, both loneli­­­ness
and social isolation are also associated with depression onset230.
A mediation analysis has found support for a pathway from social
isolation to loneliness and subsequent depression and anxiety
symptoms223, though again bi-directionality was observed. De­
pression itself may also be a mediator of the association between
loneliness and suicide attempt228.
For other mental health outcomes, longitudinal evidence is just
emerging. Cross-sectional research has found associations be­
tween loneliness and dementia, paranoia and psychotic symp­
toms231, but these tell us little about causal pathways. Recent longi­
tudinal evidence is often based on selected and/or small samples,
though providing some evidence that loneliness in young adults
is longitudinally associated with psychotic-like symptoms (but not
vice versa)232. For dementia, a systematic review of mostly longi­
tudinal studies reported stronger associations with measures of
social engagement and isolation than of loneliness233.
Such is the interest in addressing loneliness to prevent and re­
duce the severity of mental health problems234 that the UK govern­
ment has issued an international review of evidence gaps with a
call for researchers to address them234. Particular priorities in rela­
tion to mental health are understanding mechanisms, investigat­
ing the impact of loneliness and social isolation in marginalized
groups, and addressing the lack of rigorous trials of psychological
and social interventions to address these key risk factors. Addi­
tional gaps related to this field are estimates of the prevalence and
correlates of social isolation in groups other than older adults.

Social determinants in the wider social environment
Neighbourhood socioeconomic disadvantage and
inequality
Some of the earliest studies in psychiatric epidemiology investi­
gated whether neighbourhood social determinants were associat­
ed with the incidence and prevalence of mental disorders235. Early
cross-sectional studies in high-income settings identified particu­
larly high incidence rates of some severe mental disorders – espe­
cially schizophrenia and non-affective psychotic disorders more
generally235-237 – in more urban and socioeconomically disadvan­
taged neighbourhoods235,236. As with individual socioeconomic
status (see above), these studies generated considerable debate
about the relative contributions of social selection (i.e., downward

World Psychiatry 23:1 - February 2024

drift of vulnerable individuals into socially disadvantaged envi­
ronments) and social causation. This debate continues to date.
While there is now consistent evidence that people who are born
and raised in more urban and socially disadvantaged neighbour­
hoods in HICs are at greater risk of non-affective psychotic disor­
ders238-241, even after adjustment for individual-level measures of
socioeconomic status239-242, other research has suggested that this
may be due to intergenerational selection243, whereby families
with greater genetic liability to severe mental disorders are more
likely to remain or drift into more disadvantaged neighbourhoods
over time.
In the last decade, epidemiological studies that attempt to le­
verage genetic information to strengthen causal inference from
observational data have been published on this issue, with equiv­
ocal results. For example, a nationwide longitudinal study of pop­
ulation density and neighbourhood deprivation at age 15 and risk
for later schizophrenia (and depression) found that associations
were progressively attenuated to the null in analyses restricted
to first-degree cousins and siblings243, who shared, on average,
12.5% and 50% of genes respectively, implying that such associa­
tions in unrestricted population samples are due to unmeasured
familial confounding. Some additional studies, based on poly­
genic risk scores (PRS) for schizophrenia, have also found that
increased genetic liability predicts living in more densely popu­
lated244, urban245,246 and disordered245 areas in adulthood244 and
adolescence245,246. By contrast, two studies have found no rela­
tionship between PRS for schizophrenia and population density
at birth246,247. One further study found no evidence that PRS for
schizophrenia predicted deprivation in adolescence245, although
another study has shown such a relationship at birth247. Of these
studies, three went on to test whether genetic liability confounded
longitudinal associations of neighbourhood deprivation245,247 and
population density246/urbanicity245 with psychosis risk; all found
that these associations persisted after adjustment for measures of
genetic liability.
Studies of other mental disorders, including depression, anxi­
ety and bipolar disorder, have generally found less consistent gra­
dients with neighbourhood social disadvantage and urban-rural
status248,249. Most evidence has been cross-sectional, remains
equivocal and is largely based in high-income settings248,249. Lon­
gitudinal studies of incidence are sparse, and those that have been
conducted have shown mixed results. Studies based on treated
depression diagnosed in secondary care support an association
with urban birth and upbringing243,250, while no such pattern has
been observed in comparable studies of bipolar disorder251, or in
longitudinal population-based samples of depression and anxi­
ety252,253. For suicide, there is consistent evidence that risk is el­
evated in more disadvantaged, socially fragmented rural rather
than urban communities249.
Neighbourhood socioeconomic disadvantage is, of course, a
multidimensional construct. Interestingly, a recent systematic re­
view found that one aspect of neighbourhood disadvantage – i.e.,
perceived or objective levels of crime – was associated with several
mental health outcomes, including depression, psychological dis­
tress, anxiety and psychosis254, suggesting that specific aspects of

65

that disadvantage may represent putative targets for prevention.
Nonetheless, the causal nature of this effect remains to be clari­
fied, since the effects of crime were diminished after adjustment
for socioeconomic deprivation, and samples where perceived
crime and mental health are measured in the same respondents
may be prone to both same-source bias and reverse causality.
Another important neighbourhood social determinant, related
to absolute socioeconomic deprivation, is socioeconomic inequa­
lity. The aforementioned studies typically estimated associations
between average levels of neighbourhood socioeconomic disad­
vantage and mental health. In contrast, studies concerned with
inequality seek to understand whether the unequal distribution of
resources (typically based on income) within a population, com­
munity or neighbourhood is associated with health. Across HICs,
there is robust correlational evidence that countries with higher
levels of income inequality experience worse population mental
health255. A recent systematic review on within-country income
inequality also found that two thirds of included studies observed
statistically significant associations, with the majority (55%) sup­
portive of a relationship between higher inequality and worse
mental health (the so-called “income inequality hypothesis”)256.
A further 12% of studies found evidence that higher income in­
equality was associated with better mental health (supportive of
the so-called “mixed neighbourhood hypothesis”, which purports
that the presence of people with higher income levels in a neigh­
bourhood results in universal improvements in living standards,
access to resources and health). Studies supportive of the income
inequality hypothesis were more common for all outcomes stud­
ied, including depression, psychosis and general mental health,
and were conducted in both HICs and LMICs256: Their findings
persisted after control for absolute levels of socioeconomic dep­
rivation.
Although different theories exist on how higher levels of in­
equality may lead to worse mental health256, one possible expla­
nation is that highly unequal neighbourhoods erode levels of
trust, weaken social ties, and reduce positive reciprocity, leading
to greater exposure to stressogenic environments that negatively
affect mental health. This raises the possibility that neighbourhood
social capital and other related constructs may be important social
determinants of mental health, as reviewed in the next section.

Social capital, fragmentation and ethnic density
Social capital encapsulates the nature and stock of shared so­
cial resources, relationships and networks available for groups to
achieve common goals or outcomes. It encompasses concepts
of trust, reciprocity, norms of behaviour, rules for cooperation,
collective attitudes, shared language, and the size and structure of
informal and formal networks. As such, it is a complex, multidi­
mensional construct, theorized to operate at different levels (i.e.,
individual, school, workplace, neighbourhood, regional, national);
be a property of individuals or groups; and have different concep­
tual dimensions (e.g., structural/cognitive/relational, bonding/
bridging/linking257). Given such complexities, it would be surpris­

66

ing if there was a universal effect of social capital on health. Rather,
particular dimensions of social capital could be either protective
or harmful, dependent on the dimension, level and/or group ex­
posed.
Despite this challenge, a recent umbrella review concluded that
higher levels of social capital were generally associated with better
mental health outcomes258, based on a set of systematic reviews
that covered psychological distress, depression and anxiety, and
behavioural problems and well-being in children. Two reviews
from that paper found evidence of a stronger effect of cognitive
(shared language, values and codes) than structural (networks,
rules, roles) social capital on common mental disorders258.
To our knowledge, systematic review evidence on social capi­
tal and suicidal outcomes is missing. Most studies in this space are
ecological259-263, with several reporting national263, regional261,262
or neighbourhood-level259 associations between higher levels of
social capital (particularly trust) and lower suicide rates. Nonethe­
less, effect sizes for suicidal outcomes appear modest, and are of­
ten limited to – or stronger in – various subgroups, including White
men and women261, non-Hispanic Black groups262, men alone262,
younger groups259 or unmarried people259, or are sometimes not
found at all260. One of the few longitudinal studies conducted to
date reported that higher structural social capital was associated
with lower suicide rates in South Korea264, but further high-quality
evidence is required.
A recent scoping review of social capital and psychosis found
mixed evidence of an association257, with considerable heteroge­
neity in study design, definitions of social capital, assessment in­
struments, setting, control for confounders, and findings. As with
other mental health outcomes, longitudinal evidence is generally
missing. Of nine studies, four reported an overall protective effect
of higher social capital on psychosis risk, two found null results,
and three reported subgroup or nonlinear effects; here, protec­
tive effects were restricted to women265, those with a family history
of psychosis266, or people living in areas with either the lowest or
highest levels of social capital267, especially among ethnoracially
minoritized groups.
These subgroup and curvilinear effects may provide important
opportunities to triangulate evidence about how exposure to con­
textual factors in the social environment generates inequalities in
mental health between different groups. In the example above,
from the ÆSOP study of first-episode psychosis in Southeast Lon­
don267, rates of schizophrenia were higher for people living in low
or high social capital neighbourhoods, compared with moderate
levels. Social capital was estimated in a random sample of resi­
dents via a separate cross-sectional survey. Importantly, response
bias meant that White residents were over-represented in the sur­
vey, biasing estimates of social capital towards those perceived by
this group. In areas with high social capital – as disproportionately
perceived by White respondents – psychosis rates were only sub­
stantially elevated amongst ethnoracial minoritized residents, who
may have been excluded from accessing this social capital. Inter­
estingly, this has recently been replicated in longitudinal research
from Sweden amongst people with a migrant heritage268, and sim­
ilar findings have been observed in other contexts269.

World Psychiatry 23:1 - February 2024

These findings may provide a mechanistic explanation for ob­
servations from a related literature that higher levels of ethnic den­
sity – the degree to which one’s ethnoracial group is represented in
a neighbourhood – are associated with lower levels of psychosis270.
Such findings also extend to migrants271. Ethnic density is the­
orized to have a protective effect on mental health via increased
social capital (particularly bonding social capital) amongst people
who share more similar language, norms, codes, customs and cul­
tural backgrounds. These resources may help buffer against social
stressors144,272. Relatedly, higher rates of psychosis are observed
in more socially fragmented neighbourhoods273, an effect that
appears to persist at school level for young people274. A systematic
review275 has demonstrated that evidence for a protective ethnic
density effect is strongest for psychosis270,276, and extends to sui­
cide277-279, but is less consistent or strong for anxiety and depres­
sive disorders. Recent systematic review evidence also suggests
that the protective effect of high ethnic density on psychosis risk
is more consistent for Black and Latino populations, with mixed
findings for Asian ones270.
Ethnic density and social capital may be particularly important
during childhood. For example, one study found evidence that
low ethnic density during childhood was associated with later in­
creased psychosis risk276. This may be linked to greater social and
cultural isolation, or increased exposure to other risk factors for
mental health problems, such as bullying280. There is also longitu­
dinal evidence that social capital in childhood buffers the impact
of earlier childhood adversity on adolescent mental health prob­
lems281. Recent cross-sectional data from the National Comorbid­
ity Survey (Adolescent Supplement) in the US also suggest that
both school-level bonding and perceived neighbourhood social
capital are associated with lower risk of mood and anxiety disor­
ders in young people282.
As with social capital, the relationship between ethnic density
and mental health outcomes may be nonlinear283. Very high levels
of ethnic density (>80%) are indicative of racial segregation283,
and may be related to poorer mental health for Black Americans
and Asian Americans in the US283, as well as for some South Asian
groups in the UK284. In this latter country, mental well-being was
found to be poorest for people living in the most segregated com­
munities, an effect larger for Black participants and independent
of ethnic density285. In highly segregated neighbourhoods, the
buffering effect of high ethnic density may be eroded as exposure to
a range of other risk factors for mental health problems increases,
including social exclusion, deprivation, discrimination, violence
and crime. These social determinants tend to arise as downstream
effects of interpersonal, institutional and structural processes and
policies that govern patterns of residential organization286.

Physical environment
Physical environment encompasses the built environment
(housing quality, density and type; urban design), exposure to
pollution (particularly air and noise pollution), access to green and
blue space, and climate change. We consider physical environ­

World Psychiatry 23:1 - February 2024

ment as a potential social determinant of mental health because
exposure to protective or harmful physical environments is rarely
randomly distributed within or between populations. Rather, ex­
posure is influenced by many factors already described in this
paper, including socioeconomic position, minoritization, and
structural discrimination in policies, institutions and systems that
govern (in)equitable access to housing, education, employment
and income287. Given the high correlation between physical and
social environmental adversities, teasing out their causal mecha­
nisms remains a challenge, which has led two systematic reviews
conducted in 2007288 and 2018289 to conclude that there was a lack
of robust research on the role of physical environment in mental
health, with a particular paucity of high-quality longitudinal re­
search.
Nonetheless, some evidence supports an association between
mental health and specific aspects of the physical environment. For
example, longitudinal research suggests that housing regenera­
tion programs are associated with improvements in depression,
anxiety and general mental health outcomes55,288. Housing dis­
advantage is also associated with worse mental health in longi­
tudinal research55, and may lead to increased residential mobility
during childhood, which itself has been longitudinally associated
with more emotional and behavioural problems290, depression290
and psychosis291 later in life, independent of material disadvan­
tage, education and social adversities. In further longitudinal re­
search, children growing up in poorer built environments experi­
enced more emotional symptoms and conduct problems at age 3
years292.
Exposure to some air pollutants has been associated with men­
tal health and disorder, including in case-only study designs (i.e.,
self-controlled case series, case-crossover designs) that control for
short-term time invariant confounders293. A systematic review of
the effects of particulate matter (PM2.5 or PM10, i.e. finer than 2.5 or
10 microns in diameter) reported consistent evidence that shortand long-term exposure to PM2.5 was associated with increased
risk of depression and anxiety, while short-term exposure to PM10
was associated with suicide risk293. The depression association has
since been confirmed in a subsequent review294, and may extend
to other air pollutants, including ozone (O3) and nitrogen dioxide
(NO2). However, limitations remain, including publication bias,
failure to consider multiple pollutants simultaneously, and a pre­
dominantly Global North focus (although with exceptions295). It
also remains unclear whether observed associations are mediated
by effects of pollution on physical health, particularly on early life
neurodevelopment296,297. Systematic review evidence supports a
link between prenatal/perinatal exposure to PM2.5 and risk of au­
tism spectrum disorder in offspring298. Findings for other men­
tal health outcomes remain sparse, although there is emerging
­evidence of a relationship between nitrogen oxides and psychosis
299,300
​
.
Evidence on the association of green and blue space with men­
tal health is predominantly based on heterogeneous measures,
unrepresentative samples, and cross-sectional study designs, re­
sulting in mixed findings301-304. Overall, there are currently insuf­
ficient high-quality data to support this association.

67

Interest is growing in the role that climate change may have on
mental health. Various mechanisms may be involved, from in­
creased anxiety or depression arising from existential concerns for
the future, to exposure to social adversities arising as a result of cli­
mate change, including job loss, housing insecurity, displacement,
food insecurity and conflict. While high-quality direct evidence of
an impact of climate change on mental health remains missing,
our review highlights how social adversities that may occur follow­
ing climate change could exacerbate mental health inequalities.

A PREVENTIVE FRAMEWORK FOR POPULATION
MENTAL HEALTH
Preventive approaches are paramount to enable meaningful pro­
gress in reducing the prevalence and impact of social determinants
that negatively affect population mental health. Prevention in psy­
chiatry encompasses the mitigation or removal of risk modifying
factors and the enhancement of protective factors linked to men­
tal disorders305. Here, the goal is to lower the incidence, prev­alence
and recurrence of mental disorders, and the burden placed upon
individuals, their families and wider society306. Given the huge di­
rect and indirect costs of mental disorders to individuals and to
society307, there are strong ethical and economic cases for preven­
tion in psychiatry308. However, there are also costs to prevention,
some of them paradoxical, which we consider below.
Prevention strategies are best grounded in a thorough under­
standing of the epidemiological characteristics of the relevant con­
dition, and a working – although not necessarily perfect – model
of causation309. We recognize that screening, early detection, and
diagnostic testing are essential aspects of an effective prevention
strategy for mental ill health310. While other reviews have consid­
ered these clinical tools in great detail311,312, we restrict our review
of such tools to those that explicitly aim to intervene on social de­
terminants of mental ill health.

Frameworks for prevention
The WHO recognizes three levels of prevention: primary, sec­
ondary and tertiary (see Table 1). Whilst the latter two prevention
levels are critical for reducing the burden of mental disorders
through early intervention (secondary prevention) and ongoing
management (tertiary prevention), action regarding social deter­
minants falls mainly within the domain of primary prevention.
Therefore, although we briefly overview evidence from all three
levels in the following section, we devote most of our attention to
primary prevention.
Primary prevention focuses on preventing the onset of mental
disorders. This level of prevention includes universal, selective and
indicated strategies, with interventions classified on the basis of
the risk of individuals or sub-populations to develop a mental dis­
order.
Universal prevention strategies focus on entire populations,
agnostic to risk status. Classic examples include fluoridation of
drinking water to prevent dental caries, or folic acid fortification in
flour to reduce neural tube defects during embryogenesis313. In a
mental health context, examples may include teaching school chil­
dren about emotions and mental health, or the introduction of a
universal basic income, which aim to prevent mental disorders in
addition to potentially bringing wider benefits to society. However,
the potential benefits of any population-centred approach need
to be tempered by the fact that modifiable risk factors are usually
distributed unequally. Some people are at high risk, whereas most
have a lower baseline risk of developing a disorder. In other terms,
most of the burden of mental disorder in the population comes not
from the small proportion of people at the highest risk, but rather
from the far larger proportion of people with moderate or slightly
above-average risk. The use of universal preventive interventions,
therefore, has unequal costs and benefits in different individuals.
G. Rose, a British epidemiologist, considered the implications of
this309. He noted that, when we study disease incidence in a single

Table 1 World Health Organization’s classification of preventive approaches for mental disorders (adapted from Fusar-Poli et al312)
Public health framework

US Institute of Medicine

Primary prevention aims at preventing the new onset (incidence) of one
or more mental disorders, or of suicidal ideation.
Universal prevention targets the general public, or a whole population that has not
been identified on the basis of increased risk.
Selective prevention targets individuals or subgroups of the population whose risk
of developing a mental disorder is significantly higher than average, as evidenced
by biological, psychological or social risk factors.
Indicated prevention targets high-risk people who are identified as having minimal
but detectable signs or symptoms foreshadowing mental disorder, or biological
markers indicating predisposition for mental disorders, but who do not meet
diagnostic criteria for disorder at that time.
Secondary prevention aims to lower the prevalence of established cases
of the disorder or illness in the population (prevalence) through early
identification and treatment of diagnosable diseases.
Tertiary prevention includes interventions that reduce disability, enhance
rehabilitation and prevent relapses or recurrences of the illness.

68

World Psychiatry 23:1 - February 2024

While those with very high distress values (three standard devia­
tions above the mean) are at highest relative risk, the majority of
these outcomes occur in those at medium risk – one or two stan­
dard deviations above the mean. If the whole population distri­
bution could be shifted to the left, then more occurrences of sui­
cidal thoughts and non-suicidal self-injury would be prevented
than using a strategy focused on the few at highest risk315. The full
implications of this approach are yet to be explored throughout
preventive psychiatry, but there is clear evidence that this is likely
to be a fruitful area for important public mental health concerns,
including common mental disorders316,317 and suicidality315,318.
The implications are increasingly discussed310,319, but may only
be fully appreciated when large-scale prevention studies focusing
on common risk factors for multiple outcomes include measures
of mental health routinely.
Although a strong proponent of universal approaches, Rose
acknowledged that an effective prevention strategy should also
encompass selective and indicated approaches320. Selective pre­
vention strategies target individuals or sub-populations who have
higher risk than the general population for onset of mental dis­
order. This risk may be assessed using a biopsychosocial model,
through the evaluation of biological, psychological or social risk
factors for mental ill health in individuals or subgroups of the
population. Intervening in this way, particularly if early in devel­
opment, may serve to interrupt some of the pathways that lead
from risk factors to mental disorder. Indicated prevention refers

Relative risk

Prevalence in the population

population, we see determinants – genetic or environmental – of
the position of individuals within the risk distribution. However,
this can leave us blind to huge differences in risk and disease in­
cidence that may exist between populations, even though the in­
dividual determinants may be similar in both. These differences
between populations, summarized by the population mean of a
normally distributed risk factor, can be due to factors that are dis­
tinct from those that determine individual risk within those popu­
lations; individual risk can be understood only within that wider
context. The crux of Rose’s argument is that more cases of a dis­
order may be prevented by focusing on shifting the population
mean (or other measure of central tendency) to make the whole
distribution of the sicker population’s risk profile look more like
the healthier’s one, rather than by targeting the minority at very
high risk in the population (see Figure 1). The “prevention para­
dox” is the potential downside of this strategy; while the preven­
tion may come with some costs for all – even if only a matter of
inconvenience – most individuals will receive little to no benefit
from the intervention, even though the benefits for the population
as a whole may be large314.
Much of Rose’s work considered physical health, particularly
cardiovascular disease, but he believed that the same principles
would apply to mental disorders. As an example, Polek et al315
showed the implications of a normally distributed risk factor (e.g.,
mental distress) for the occurrence of suicidal thoughts and nonsuicidal self-injury in a sample of adolescents and young adults.

1

-3SD

-2SD

-1SD

Proportion of cases in population

Mean

+1SD

+2SD

Relative risk of disorder

+3SD
Risk factor distribution

Figure 1 Hypothetical relationship between a normally distributed risk factor, relative risk of mental disorder and the proportion of cases in the
general population. A risk factor for mental disorder is normally distributed in the population with a hypothetical mean and standard deviation,
SD (bell curve indicated by solid black line). That risk factor is associated with a hypothetical relative risk of mental disorder, indicated by the
dashed black exponential curve. For convenience, we set the relative risk to be 1 (grey dashed horizontal line) at the mean level of exposure to
that risk factor. The hypothetical proportion of cases that arise in the population are indicated by the grey bars. Under these assumptions, most
cases of disorder in the population will occur for those only exposed to moderate levels of the risk factor (from the mean to +2 SD above the
mean). Fewer cases will be generated by the small proportion of the population beyond +3 SD above the mean, even though they are at substan-­­
tially greater relative risk. Thus, following G. Rose’s argument309, more cases of disorder in a population may be prevented by intervening at
lower levels of exposure in the general population than by targeting high-risk groups. This hypothetical argument has been confirmed in psychiatry
(see, for example, Polek et al315).

World Psychiatry 23:1 - February 2024

69

to interventions designed for high-risk populations who are al­
ready identified as having symptomatology of mental disorder, but
whose symptoms are sub-threshold for diagnosis.
Importantly, different levels of prevention may be additive, such
that an individual may at once be the target of multiple levels of
prevention strategies. This is perhaps demonstrated most clearly
in schools, where so-called “multi-tiered systems of support” offer
a gradated approach to student mental health, whereby all stu­
dents receive universal interventions, and a smaller proportion
are offered selective and/or indicated interventions, depending on
risk status321. Such approaches can be adapted depending on con­
text322.

of mental disorders begin early in life; c) preventing the onset of
these problems earlier provides the best opportunity to interrupt
intergenerational transmission of cyclical relationships between
social determinants and mental health problems; d) the incidence
and prevalence of mental health problems and disorders amongst
children and young people is increasing, making this an impera­
tive matter of social justice.

Universal prevention strategies
Parenting interventions

Parents play a crucial role in the emotional and behavioural de­
velopment of a child. Consequently, many programs have been de­­­­veloped to enhance positive aspects of the parents’ influence. Pro­
As we argue throughout this paper, social determinants repre­ active and positive parenting techniques increase parent-child at­
sent some of the most modifiable intervention targets in a field tachment and build self-esteem and confidence, which reduce be­
where the development of new treatments for established disor­ havioural problems328,329. The most common parenting programs
ders has largely stagnated. In contrast to other areas of medicine are group-based, which may be a cost-effective method of reach­
in which preventive approaches have established strong roots, ap­ ing their goals, and last 8-12 weeks, with 1-2 hour sessions week­
proaches to prevention in psychiatry are inequitably prioritized, ly328,329.
with the majority of available resources devoted to secondary (and
Evidence consistently supports the efficacy of these programs
tertiary) treatment of existing mental disorders (and their con­ in improving child mental health. For example, a systematic re­
sequences), rather than preventing the onset of new disorders323. view of 24 intervention trials of short-term group-based parenting
The dearth of action on primary prevention in mental health has programs for children under 4 years old found that the programs
been recast as one of the grand challenges in global mental health324, had beneficial effects on overall child mental health and behav­
and very likely hinders progress in reducing the incidence, preva­ iour, as well as on parent-child interaction329. There is further sys­
lence and burden of mental disorders that afflict society319.
tematic review evidence that two of the most common parenting
interventions – the Triple P program330 and the Incredible Years
program331 – reduce disruptive behaviour in this age group. The
PREVENTION STRATEGIES THAT ADDRESS SOCIAL effects of parenting interventions may be more pronounced for ex­
DETERMINANTS: THE EVIDENCE
ternalizing than internalizing symptoms329, although there is also
strong systematic review evidence from RCTs supporting benefi­
In this section, we use the preventive framework introduced a-­ cial effects for the latter332. A remarkable finding from one review
bove to review evidence for the efficacy of prevention strategies was that the estimated number needed to prevent one case of ado­
that target some of the major social determinants of mental health lescent anxiety was only 10, a number which is much smaller than
outlined earlier. We principally focus on primary prevention strat­ that for many common medical interventions332. With that in mind,
egies, including universal, selective and indicated approaches. We it is perhaps not surprising that cost-benefit analyses of common
also briefly review important secondary and tertiary prevention strat­ parenting programs demonstrate cost savings330.
egies that aim to promote recovery in those with established con­
A recent trial described a short (four 90 min sessions) perinatal
ditions. We focus on prevention strategies where we believe evi­ parenting intervention that focused on sharing and understand­
dence is strongest (summarized in Figure 2), based on systematic ing parenting roles in a co-parenting model333. The intervention
reviews, randomized controlled trials (RCTs) or quasi-experimen­ aimed to reduce parenting stress to improve child outcomes. When
tal evidence, where available. Additionally, we highlight areas the child was aged 1 year, parents in the intervention arm rated
where the evidence base is weaker, equivocal or absent. We also their offspring as having lower negative emotionality and lower
draw the readers’ attention to reviews and reports of prevention externalizing symptoms, although these effects did not extend to
strategies that aim to promote mental health and reduce mental age 2 years, 20 months after the program conclusion.
distress and disorder312,325-327.
There is also evidence from a review of 48 trials that parenting
We believe that the strategies that are particularly crucial for interventions lead to benefits for parents as well as children, in­
effective public mental health promotion and prevention are those cluding reductions in parental depression, anxiety, stress, anger
which target social determinants in the early life course, beginning and guilt, and increases in confidence and relationship satisfac­
prenatally and extending into infancy, childhood and adolescence. tion328. Perhaps as a consequence, studies of the Triple P parent­
There are several reasons to support this: a) 50% of all mental ing program have also shown that participation is associated with
health conditions begin by age 1819; b) many of the antecedents reductions in child abuse and maltreatment330. From a global

Prioritizing primary prevention

70

World Psychiatry 23:1 - February 2024

Figure 2 Summary of the social determinants of mental health and disorder and of the main primary prevention strategies

World Psychiatry 23:1 - February 2024

71

perspective, it is reassuring to see that parenting programs imple­
mented in HICs have similar positive outcomes in lower-income
settings such as sub-Saharan Africa334.
Several key questions remain about optimizing parenting in­
terventions, including whether effects persist in the absence of the
intervention over the long term (observed by one332 but not other
reviews328,335), the ideal age to intervene (with evidence of benefi­
cial effects associated with interventions in both childhood331 and
adolescence332,336), and whether they should be deployed univer­
sally or to selective populations (bigger effect size of parenting in­
terventions have been found for high-risk families332). Another set
of related early-life interventions – home visits during pregnancy
– have been deployed as more selective prevention strategies, re­
viewed later.

School-based mental health programs
Schools are potentially optimal settings for public health prac­
titioners to provide universal mental health promotion and pre­
vention. Numerous such programs have been designed for school
children, and may be adapted to offer nested selective and indi­
cated interventions.
Many school-based programs focus on mental health literacy,
with the aim of educating youth about mental health, reducing
stigma related to mental disorders, and encouraging help-seeking
behaviour337. A recent systematic review of RCTs showed that
these programs increase mental health literacy and reduce stigma,
although there is a lack of evidence on whether these effects per­
sist over the long term337. Whether they increase help-seeking be­
haviour remains unclear338.
School-based interventions that focus on reducing disruptive
behaviour have existed for many decades. A 2011 umbrella review
concluded that these programs are effective in reducing external­
izing problems339. The Good Behaviour Game, for example, was
developed in 1969, and is a team-based activity designed to re­
ward children for pro-social behaviour and discourage disruptive
behaviour340. RCTs have shown that the Good Behaviour Game is
effective in reducing conduct problems in children340. Although
the primary focus is on behavioural regulation, the program also
supports emotional regulation. A recent Australian trial showed
that the program also decreased internalizing symptoms341. Re­
markably, one study followed up students at age 21/22 who had
participated in the program in school when aged 6 years, and found
that participants were less likely to report suicidal thoughts and
attempts compared with controls342.
There are several school-based programs that specifically fo­
cus on prevention of depression and anxiety. A 2017 systematic
review (updated in 2021) summarized evidence from 90 interven­
tion studies343,344. The majority of interventions were based on 812 sessions of 45-90 min of cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT),
modified for the classroom344. The review clearly showed that
these programs were effective in reducing symptoms of depres­
sion and anxiety, though effect sizes were generally small343,344. Al­
though such programs are often delivered universally, effect sizes

72

for depression were larger for trials that targeted higher-risk stu­
dent populations (i.e., selective and indicated approaches)343,344.
Notably, while effect sizes for preventing depression and anxiety
were relatively small, they persisted in long-term follow-up343,344.
Furthermore, the authors of the 2017 review point out that even
small effects can have big impacts on prevention from a popula­
tion perspective344, aligning with Rose's argument. Relevantly,
a 2016 review estimated that universal prevention programs of
depression and anxiety delivered in schools (mostly CBT-based)
prevented 50% of cases of a diagnosable internalizing disorder in
the following 6 to 9 months345.
Recently, several mindfulness-based programs have been de­
veloped and trialled for school-aged children346. Mindfulness ap­­­
proaches encourage people to intensely focus on the present mo­
ment, in order to calm physiological responses and reduce stress.
A 2022 systematic review of 66 RCTs found that mindfulness pro­
grams for children are successful in reducing anxiety/stress (ana­
lyzed as a combined outcome) and depressive symptoms​346, a­l­­
though effect sizes tended to be small and were limited to selective
rather than universal samples. Trials in universal samples found no
evidence of improvements in mental health, despite small improve­
ments in behavioural outcomes, executive function and attention.
Further, there were no positive effects in studies that included fol­
low-up beyond program conclusion346.
Another group of school-based mental health programs focus
specifically on suicide prevention. These programs tend to take
three forms: a) awareness and education initiatives, which seek
to inform students about suicidal behaviour to reduce stigma and
increase likelihood of help-seeking behaviour; b) gatekeeper train­­­
ing, which seeks to teach students or teachers to identify signs of
suicidality, and refer students to appropriate services; and c) screen­­­
ing programs, which seek to identify risk factors for suicide or sui­
cidal thoughts, with the aim of referring people who screen posi­
tive for further assessment and/or treatment347,348. Several reviews
have concluded that these programs are successful in reducing
suicidal thoughts, including 12 months after program completion
347,349
. The most recent review concluded that similar effects are seen
for suicide attempts, with some evidence that these effects may last
for up to 20 years348.
As with many school-based interventions, suicide prevention
programs are most successful when they are multi-faceted347. One
excellent example is the Saving and Empowering Young Lives in
Europe (SEYLE) program, a suicide prevention RCT implemented
in 168 schools across 10 countries350. The intervention included
training teachers and school staff to be gatekeepers, delivering
a mental health and suicide literacy program for students, and
screening for high-risk students. At 12-month follow-up, partici­
pants in intervention schools were 50% less likely to have experi­
enced suicidal thoughts and suicide attempts in the previous two
weeks compared with students from control schools350.
Several reviews have highlighted that little evidence exists on
cost-effectiveness of school-based programs in prevention of men­tal health problems337,344. One review on prevention of depression
and anxiety in schools estimated that the number needed to pre­
vent one case per 100 children was 70 students345, while the authors

World Psychiatry 23:1 - February 2024

of the SEYLE trial concluded that the program could prevent one
suicide attempt for every 167 students who participated in the
program350. Depending on the resources required for these pro­
grams, these prevented outcomes could represent important cost
savings. Nevertheless, rigorous economic evaluations are needed,
particularly those that take a long-term perspective. An additional
limitation of research on school-based interventions is that few
studies have included functional assessment; a recent commen­
tary argued that measuring function may better reflect the success,
or lack thereof, of programs whose aim is to allow children to flour­
ish351.
Finally, it should be noted that the overwhelming majority of
studies in this area are from HICs, although available evidence
suggests that schools are also a suitable setting to deliver mental
health promotion interventions in LMICs322. On the other hand,
rates of school enrollment vary dramatically between countries,
and it cannot be excluded that school-based programs inadver­
tently exacerbate mental health inequalities for those unable to
access basic education. Moreover, recent concern has been raised
that some aspects of school-based mental health interventions
could increase levels of distress amongst some young people352.
This requires further investigation so that safety can be fully bal­
anced alongside demonstration of efficacy.

Interventions that address loneliness
The evidence base is weak for preventive interventions that ad­
dress loneliness, in order to prevent onset of mental health prob­­­
lems, or to reduce severity or improve prognosis of pre-existing
men­tal disorders. Such interventions might be best situated among
universal approaches, given that the stigma of loneliness dissuades
uptake of targeted interventions, but in reality they may need to
straddle universal, selective and indicated approaches. Built en­­vironment interventions to address loneliness and mental health,
whilst showing promise in terms of acceptability, have no evi­­
dence of effectiveness353. Systematic reviews of trials of interven­
tions addressing loneliness do not include mental health impacts.
Consequently, we need investment in evaluations that encompass
both physical and mental health354.

Selective prevention strategies
Direct economic interventions
Given the demonstrably strong links between poverty, socio­
economic disadvantage and poor mental health reviewed earlier,
selective interventions that improve people’s socioeconomic posi­
tion could be crucial policy levers to improve population mental
health. Although economic inequality primarily affects the health
of the poorest, it is also linked to worse mental health of the whole
population256,355. This suggests that interventions that reduce in­
equality by targeting selective or indicated groups could even
have universal mental health benefits. There is already evidence

World Psychiatry 23:1 - February 2024

that policies driven by progressive welfare economics are associ­
ated with fewer mental health inequalities according to socio­
economic circumstances356,357. A recent systematic review of 136
studies found that increases in individual and household income
improved mental health and well-being, while decreases had the
opposite effect49. These effects were strongest when individuals
were lifted out of poverty.
This evidence has added to debate on whether guaranteed in­
comes or cash transfers have beneficial effects on mental health.
From 1974 to 1979, a guaranteed annual income experiment in
rural Manitoba, Canada, ensured that families met at least 60% of
what Statistics Canada considered the cut-off to be designated as a
low-income family. Evaluations later showed a statistically signifi­
cant reduction in hospitalizations during the program, primarily
related to mental health, and this effect persisted for at least 6 years
after program completion358.
Much of the research on the potential benefits of cash transfer
programs have focused on child and adolescent mental health. For
example, a recent systematic review found causal evidence that
adolescent mental health (specifically, internalizing problems)
improved when their families were lifted from poverty359, and a
review of child benefit programs introduced in Canada since 1945
showed that they had positive effects on child mental health and
behaviour360.
It should be noted, however, that the success of cash transfer
programs may vary according to economic context, gender, imple­
mentation of program, and local culture361. For example, the afore­
mentioned systematic review on changes in income and mental
health found stronger effects of poverty alleviation programs on
mental health in LMICs49, and other reviews have found simi­
lar positive effects for cash transfer programs in these contexts in
adults362 and children359,361. These effects may be long-lasting. For
example, a cash transfer program in Kenya showed that, 4 years
after program implementation, youth whose families participated
in the program had significantly fewer depressive symptoms363.
Similar findings may also extend to low-income settings in HICs.
For example, a natural experiment in the US investigated the role
of income supplementation on child mental health following the
opening of a casino on American Indian reserve land364. It demon­
strated that children who were lifted out of poverty had statistically
significant reductions in symptoms of conduct and oppositional
defiant disorders compared with those who remained in poverty,
falling to levels seen amongst children never exposed to poverty in
the same region364.
Some cash transfer programs include mandatory conditions for
recipients. Oportunidades, one of the first conditional cash trans­
fer programs, was implemented in Mexico, and supplemented
participants’ income by 20-30% on the conditions that children
were enrolled in school, and that family members took part in pre­
ventive medicine programs and attended health-related presen­
tations. For families who enrolled when their child was less than
2 years old, children had fewer behavioural problems when aged
8-10 years compared with children who were enrolled in the pro­
gram 18 months later365.
Critics of conditional cash transfer programs have pointed out

73

that they are highly paternalistic in nature, exacerbate genderbased inequalities, and do not solve structural problems that lead
to long-term poverty366. Indeed, one systematic review found that
placing conditions on monetary interventions may have detri­
mental effects on adolescent mental health in some sub-popula­
tions, in particular girls, for whom conditional cash transfers may
add to existing pressures including household duties and caring
responsibilities359.

also included monthly nurse home visits for the first two years
of the child’s life, showed that children of mothers who received
nurse visits had overall lower scores on the Strengths and Difficul­
ties Questionnaire, indicating fewer emotional and behavioural
problems373. Interestingly, the same study showed positive out­
comes for parents across a wide range of domains, including less
hostility, less parent-child conflict, higher well-being and qual­
ity of life, and increased self-efficacy. Whether such interventions
would show the same effect if implemented universally remains
unclear.

Early-life home visit programs
As evidence has accumulated supporting the effects of peri­
natal stress on brain development367, public health practitioners
have focused more attention on supporting healthy development
early in life. Home visitation programs for pregnant or post-par­
tum mothers, their partners, and their children have often been
delivered to selected populations at risk of experiencing consider­
able social disadvantage, adversity and negative health outcomes.
These groups have often included low-income families, and moth­
ers who are young, unmarried, socially isolated or from ethnora­
cial minoritized backgrounds368.
Home visitation programs vary in delivered activities, but the
general aim is to improve the home environment for the new child.
These programs often include aspects of social support for new
parents, education about child development, informal training
about positive parenting techniques (and avoidance of negative
parenting behaviours), and facilitation of mother-child interaction.
This is important because different parenting practices have been
consistently associated with levels of child aggression, delinquency
and socioemotional functioning, with authoritarian (e.g., harsh)
parenting styles leading to poorer child outcomes than authori­
tative (e.g., affection balanced with discipline) approaches369. A
systematic review of 34 RCTs and quasi-experimental studies that
investigated the effect of home visitation programs found that they
resulted in improvements in the home environment, particularly
in studies that used robust measures of parenting behaviours368.
Some notable RCTs in the US have examined perinatal monthly
home visit interventions by nurses. For example, in a trial conduct­
ed in Memphis, TN, women received nurse visits during preg­nan­
cy, immediately post-partum, and several times until the child’s
second birthday, while the control group received usual peri­na­
tal care370. At age 6 years, children of mothers who received the
nurse visits had fewer behavioural problems and were less likely
to be aggressive. In another trial in rural New York state, women at
higher risk of mental health difficulties due to their social position
were randomized to receive nurse home visits until the child’s sec­
ond birthday or treatment as usual371. At age 15 years, children of
mothers who received nurse visits drank less alcohol and were less
likely to be involved in criminal activity compared with children
in the control arm; this intervention was also highly cost-effective,
with a return on investment realized by the time the child reached
age 4 years. This intervention continued to exhibit marked divi­
dends into adolescence, through reduced welfare and justice sys­
tem involvement372. A similar intervention study in Australia, that

74

Neighbourhood interventions
The neighbourhood may offer an effective level at which to pre­
vent mental disorders and promote mental health. Nonetheless,
designing, testing and implementing interventions which seek to
modify social or physical environments in order to improve pub­
lic health is notoriously difficult. For this reason, most research to
date remains observational353,374.
The classic example of an RCT to lift people out of neighbour­
hood poverty is Moving To Opportunity, conducted in five US
cities, in which families in high-poverty neighbourhoods were
randomized to receive housing vouchers to move to low-poverty
neighbourhoods375. At 3-year follow-up, there was evidence of re­
duced distress/anxiety symptoms amongst parents in the inter­
vention arm, and reduced depressive/anxiety symptoms in chil­
dren, though these results were restricted to boys and younger
children (8-13 years)375. Nonetheless, later follow-ups have found
differential effects on adolescent mental health, including higher
risk of conduct disorder, PTSD and depression in boys, and lower
risk of conduct disorder in girls in the intervention arm376-378. The
reasons for this are likely to be multifaceted, but may include sexspecific differences in interactions with new social environments,
including the social skills required to navigate more affluent en­
vironments, or the consequences of increased residential and
school moves on social integration and support378. Such issues
further highlight the potential unintended harms that may result
from some forms of intervention that attempt to lift people out of
poverty.
Neighbourhood regeneration programs379 have been rarely
tested. One exception is a cluster randomized trial in Philadel­
phia380, which reported lower depressive symptoms and improved
self-worth amongst residents in intervention settings where a green­
ing initiative focused on improving the physical quality of the built
environment by planting trees, removing litter, and landscaping
vacant land in urban settings. A recent review of interventions to
promote housing affordability and stability found no evidence of
improved mental health outcomes in selective populations (par­
ticularly homeless and Veteran groups)381.
The paucity of evidence for neighbourhood interventions re­
flects the complexity of delivering such interventions and their pos­
si­ble unintended consequences, despite evidence that neighbour­
hood social disadvantage, fragmentation and social capital are sig­
nificantly associated with mental health.

World Psychiatry 23:1 - February 2024

Public mental health interventions for specific
populations
Several minoritized groups are at increased risk of developing
mental health problems and disorders, so selective interventions
in these groups may be particularly effective in reducing mental
health inequalities at the population level. One clear example is
providing interventions to refugee groups who are vulnerable to
worse mental health. There is systematic review evidence from
RCTs that providing psychosocial interventions to refugees is
effective in reducing PTSD symptoms382. Encouragingly, brief in­
dividual383 or group-based384,385 psychological and behavioural
interventions appear to reduce depressive and internalizing symp­
toms in refugees, including children386 and adolescents384, though
these may not be sustained in the long-term post-inter­vention385,
and some evidence is of low quality386. A recent systematic review
also found evidence that community-based inter­ventions which
provided refugees with greater bridging and linking social capital
(i.e., building ties with others in the community, helping them nav­
igate new structures, systems and institutions) may be most effec­
tive in reducing mental health symptoms in this population387. None­
theless, the variable quality and small number of studies includ­
ed in these reviews requires this promising evidence base to be
strengthened.
Selective interventions in ethnoracial minoritized groups have
also been investigated. In many contexts, the intersectionality with
socioeconomic disadvantage means that interventions targeted at
low-income parents, families or neighbourhoods are sometimes
implicitly selected on a high proportion of people from ethnora­
cial minoritized backgrounds371. Generally, evidence suggests that
these interventions are effective in benefiting mental health across
different ethnic groups, including the aforementioned Incred­
ible Years parenting intervention in both European388 and North
American389 settings. While these studies lend some support to
the effectiveness of culturally-agnostic interventions, there is also
evidence that culturally-adapted mental health interventions offer
more benefits in some ethnoracial minoritized groups over nonadapted treatments or treatment-as-usual390,391. Further, given that
experiences of discrimination and stigma operate at various levels
as barriers to mental health help-seeking, understanding how
cultural and structural factors intersect to produce mental health
inequalities in ethnoracial minoritized groups remains a critical
prerequisite to developing effective selective interventions that re­
duce these experiences and promote mental health392.
There is also emerging evidence that selective interventions for
sexual and gender minority groups can be effective in improving
mental health outcomes393. These include policy-level interven­
tions, family interventions, and provision of coordinated men­
tal health services, with evidence of beneficial effects on mental
health, substance use and bullying victimization amongst minori­
tized youth393. Others have highlighted the importance of building
up cultural competence amongst health care professionals as a vi­
tal intervention to reducing mental health inequities for LGBTQ+
people187. Nonetheless, as for other minoritized groups, barriers
around mistrust of health care providers represent a further ob­

World Psychiatry 23:1 - February 2024

stacle (and target) for improving timely access to preventive men­
tal health care and support.

Indicated prevention strategies
Indicated strategies to prevent the onset of mental disorders typ­
ically seek to identify high-risk individuals on the basis of emerging
sub-threshold psychopathology or family history of psychiatric
illness with an associated decline in functioning. The delivery of
indicated prevention has principally focused on youth-oriented
mental health care provision to prevent transition to disorder. This
ranges from specialist secondary care (e.g., early detection services
for psychosis) through to disorder-agnostic youth mental services
that adopt clinical staging models to provide care according to ill­
ness stage. Most recently, these models are being repositioned as
broad-spectrum integrated primary care services for youth mental
health that deliver indicated prevention in a variety of innovative
ways, and in a variety of contexts, including digitally, in educational
settings, workplaces, the community, and clinical spaces311. They
offer various interventions to indicated populations, ranging from
clinical therapy to peer advocacy and psychosocial interventions
to promote resilience, improve mental health literacy or improve
social support. Only some of these interventions aim to explicitly
tackle social determinants of mental health (social support, lone­
liness, bullying), usually as part of a multidisciplinary approach.
Just as the pattern of risk for mental disorders is socially inequi­
table, so too is the likelihood of receiving clinical care that is deliv­
ered in a timely, appropriate and proportionate manner according
to need187,396. This is a global challenge driven by various issues in
different settings, including stigma, health literacy, cultural norms,
system capacity and economic development. Because indicated
prevention strategies predominantly originated from clinical sys­
tems of care, identification and inclusion of high-risk populations
is subject to similar barriers and inequities. For example, there
is evidence that people from socioeconomically disadvantaged,
migrant and ethnoracial minoritized backgrounds are under-rep­
resented in services for early detection of psychosis397-399, as well
as in child and adolescent mental health services400. These biases
may be compounded by the instruments used to identify highrisk individuals, which are often developed394,401 and tested402 in
unrepresentative, help-seeking samples. These inequalities mean
that those already exposed to substantial disadvantage are least
likely to receive indicated prevention, and less likely to take part in
research that informs us about what works for whom, making this
an imperative matter of social justice403.
Furthermore, as currently configured, indicated prevention strat­
egies are unlikely to substantially reduce the incidence and prev­
alence of mental disorders, because they currently lack sufficient
population coverage to do so. For example, studies in England398
and Australia399 have shown that only 4-22% of people diagnosed
with first-episode psychosis in services for early intervention in
psychosis had prior contact with early detection services before ill­
ness onset. This calls for broader-based transdiagnostic indicated
prevention solutions which could be integrated into community

75

and school settings, as recently evidenced and advocated by Mc­
Gorry et al311, explicitly addressing social determinants of mental
health.

Secondary and tertiary prevention strategies
In this section, we present a brief overview of existing social inter­
ventions that aim to optimize various aspects of recovery in peo­
ple with established mental disorders.

these effects could be restricted to older adolescents and may be
affected by risk of bias concerns424. Secondary and tertiary family
interventions can also lead to reductions in parental stress and
depression, and improvements in parenting behaviours422,425,
which may be particularly relevant to interrupting intergenera­
tional transmission of familial risks for mental health problems424.
These effects also extend to LMICs, with 65% of interventions being
delivered by non-specialist workers425,426.

Trauma-informed interventions
Social prescribing
Social prescribing, primarily adopted by primary care physi­
cians, connects individuals with established mental disorders to
sources of social support within local communities404. Examples
include volunteering, befriending, and hobby groups405. Despite
its popularity, the evidence base lags behind practice, with studies
currently lacking methodological rigour406,407. Although positive
effects on various mental health outcomes have been observed
in systematic reviews404,408-410, the quality of evidence is generally
low408-411, and restricted to uncontrolled samples408,409,411 or selec­
tive subgroups410. There is also initial evidence that minoritized
groups are under-represented in social prescribing412; factors such
as finance, language and cultural barriers may pose issues around
access and engagement.

Vocational interventions
Given the cyclical relationship between socioeconomic disad­
vantage and mental health, secondary and tertiary interventions
that help people return to work or education should be considered
an important component of public mental health policies. One
such example is Individual Placement and Support (IPS), where
an employment specialist supports an individual with mental
health problems to seek competitive employment. IPS has been
consistently demonstrated to be superior over other forms of vo­
cational interventions to help individuals with severe mental ill­
nesses obtain and maintain competitive employment413-415. These
findings hold across geographical locations and across high- and
low-resource settings413, though success and uptake may de­
pend on motivation and self-efficacy in job seeking, which may
introduce additional barriers for those already exposed to greater
structural and systemic disadvantage416-418. While these interven­
tions may benefit people with other mental health outcomes, they
appear most effective for severe mental disorders419.

Family interventions
It is well known that family interventions can help reduce risk of
relapse for people with psychosis420,421. They also appear to reduce
depression and suicidal ideation in young people422,423, though

76

Traumatic events contribute substantially to mental health in­
equal­ities, as we highlighted earlier. Given this, models of traumainformed care have gained traction in secondary prevention, and
may be particularly pertinent to recovery for specific groups, in­
cluding victims of intimate partner violence, ethnoracial minori­
tized groups, and refugees and asylum seekers with established
mental disorders. To date, the most commonly adopted and eval­
uated approaches include eye movement desensitization and re­
processing (EMDR) and trauma-focused CBT427,428. Despite this, a
recent systematic review429, which largely focused on interperson­
al traumas in women, found inconsistent evidence that trauma-in­
formed interventions improve a range of psychological outcomes,
including symptoms of PTSD, anxiety and depression. The authors
attributed this to inadequate study designs, also observed by other
reviews430,431, and called for broader trauma types and outcomes
to be rigorously evaluated. For children and young people exposed
to trauma, systematic reviews show moderate effects for EMDR
and trauma-focused CBT – but not conventional CBT428 – in the
treatment of PTSD428,432. Meta-analytic evidence also demon­
strates moderate effectiveness of trauma interventions in reducing
symptoms of PTSD, depression and anxiety for displaced persons
in HICs382 and LMICs433. Greatest effects were found for traumafocused CBT, particularly with extensive cultural adaptations434.

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ACTION
In this paper we have highlighted the social gradients in the in­
cidence and prevalence of psychological distress and mental dis­
orders within and between populations. This evidence consistently
shows that those exposed to adverse social determinants of health
– whether through poverty, discrimination, trauma or exclusion
– are most likely to experience poor mental health over their life­
time, as well as downstream physical health, social and economic
sequalae that can perpetuate cycles of intergenerational inequal­
ity in health and social outcomes. We have also shown how these
inequalities arise through a broader set of structural processes and
policies that disadvantage minoritized and marginalized individu­
als and communities through experiences of interpersonal, insti­
tutional and systemic discrimination. These experiences prevent
equitable access to adequate education, employment, housing,
social support and health care, which subsequently increase expo­
sure to stressful life events and risk of poor mental health.

World Psychiatry 23:1 - February 2024

What, then, can and should be done? We argue that primary pre­
vention should be prioritized to address and remove social ineq­
uities in order to prevent the onset of mental disorder and lower
the burden of psychiatric morbidity in the population. There are at
least three compelling reasons for this case. First, equality is central
to human rights435, and so efforts to reduce social inequities that affect
population mental health are a matter of social justice. Second,
since many psychiatric disorders exhibit such social gradients, uni­
versal, selective or indicated primary prevention strategies would
not only promote more equitable mental health, but also achieve
substantial gains in improving the mental health of whole popula­
tions. Finally, while recognizing the vitality of secondary and ter­
tiary prevention in treatment, recovery and relapse prevention for
people with existing mental disorders, primary prevention needs
to be integrated into equitable and accessible whole-population
care systems. Here, parity of investment in eff­ective primary pre­
vention would represent a win-win-win for individuals, popu­
lations and health care systems, both in LMIC contexts, where sec­
ondary and tertiary mental health care services are often extremely
limited, and in HIC contexts, where need for care has outstripped
capacity41.
In this concluding section, we identify seven recommendations
for action (see Table 2), which provide a roadmap for mental health
professionals, policy makers and researchers to improve popula­
tion mental health and reduce inequities in mental health prob­
lems by prioritizing intervention on social determinants.

1. Make social justice central to all public mental health
interventions
Social justice is concerned with the fair (equitable) distribution
of wealth, power, opportunities and privileges within society. No
society is perfectly just. To a greater or lesser extent, different soci­
eties will have differing levels of fairness in access to the economic,
social and political means that allow individuals or groups to de­
termine and realize their preferred goals and outcomes. The equi­
table (fair, just) distribution of resources is closely related, but not
always identical to the equal (balanced, proportionate) distribu­
tion of resources. For example, on average, older adults (of working
age) tend to have higher incomes than younger adults, holding all
other variables constant, as a result of accumulated knowledge
and experience; income is thus surely unequally distributed by
age, but we may choose not to consider this inequitable.
Accordingly, not all differences in mental health are, per se, in­
equitable. Men are more prone to develop schizophrenia than
women198, potentially due to biological differences436, but this
difference is likely not to be a matter of social justice. By contrast,
while the elevated prevalence of depression in women may also
be partly biologically determined437, there is strong evidence that
it may also result from greater exposure to interpersonal violence,
childhood trauma or other gendered social or psychological factors
200,437
, making interventions to prevent these inequitable experi­
ences a remedial matter of social justice.
We consider that most social differences in the onset and main­

World Psychiatry 23:1 - February 2024

Table 2 Overview of recommendations for action to intervene on social
determinants to improve population mental health and reduce inequities in mental health problems
1. Make social justice central to all public mental health interventions.
Mental health problems are inequitably distributed between and within
populations, principally arising from systemic structural inequalities.
Making social justice core to all public mental health interventions and
policies would reduce these inequities.
2. Invest in interventions that pay off in multiple domains. Few social
determinants solely affect mental health. Investing in interventions that
target key social determinants will improve physical, mental and social
outcomes for individuals and communities. Intervention programs
should routinely measure mental health alongside these other outcomes.
3. Invest in interventions that target critical windows of the life
course to interrupt intergenerational transmission of mental health
inequalities. Providing good-quality and accessible parental and familial
support early in life can interrupt the intergenerational transmission of
mental health inequalities within families or communities.
4. Prioritize interventions that focus on poverty alleviation. Any
comprehensive public health approach to reduce the burden of poor
mental health must include efforts to reduce poverty. Poverty is
inextricably linked to most social determinants of mental health, and
could be considered a root cause.
5. Strengthen causal inference in research on social determinants
of mental health and primary prevention. Most research on social
determinants of mental health is observational, often subject to selection
and confounding bias. Stronger causal inference methods are needed, as
well as larger, interdisciplinary observational and experimental studies
in representative and adequately powered samples to accelerate progress
of knowledge and develop effective primary interventions.
6. Establish inclusive longitudinal population mental health monitoring.
Many countries struggle to accurately estimate psychiatric morbidity
in their populations, which inhibits both clinical and public mental
health provision. Samples are often unrepresentative. Reliable, inclusive
and precise longitudinal monitoring of population mental health is the
essential basis for effective prevention.
7. Ensure parity between primary, secondary and tertiary prevention in
mental health. Investing sufficiently in primary prevention to stop the
onset of mental disorders prevents suffering, improves quality of life
and societal outcomes, and reduces demand for secondary and tertiary
prevention.

tenance of mental health problems arise from inequitable expo­
sure to structural disadvantage, thus requiring the principles of so­
cial justice to be embedded at the heart of all public mental health
policy efforts to prevent mental disorders. It has been argued that
“the job of justice in its most pressing role demands a permanent
vigilance and attention to social and economic determinants that
compound and reinforce insufficiencies in a number of dimen­
sions of well-being”5, p.78. Logically, then, this requires public men­
tal health, and public policy more broadly, to ensure that all pre­
vention strategies explicitly redress social, economic, political and
environmental insufficiencies that both increase the risk of men­
tal disorders and inhibit people’s recovery from them. Preven­
tion strategies and policies that embed social justice theory from
their conception are most likely to be effective in reducing social
inequities in mental disorders, and in shifting the entire popula­
tion distribution of risk. This approach requires careful theoretical
and empirical consideration of various issues, including what suf­

77

ficient conditions would look like, and which social determinants
should be prioritized from the perspective of social justice. These
issues will vary over time and between different contexts. For ex­
ample, while poverty alleviation is a global goal likely to improve
mental health universally359, it may be a more imperative matter
of social justice in LMICs, where a much higher proportion of the
population live in poverty.
Finally, the need for social justice applies not only to the strate­
gies and policies to address social determinants of health, but also
to the research that supports them. Our review has focused on the
disproportionate body of evidence from HICs in the Global North.
While we have highlighted evidence from LMICs where we have
identified it, and while many determinants are likely to be similar,
others may be different2. Social justice requires both accelerated
investment into further high-quality research on the most effec­
tive prevention strategies for social determinants in LMICs, and
strategies to counteract the inequitable reproduction of knowl­
edge concentrated on the Global North that reviews unavoidably
perpetuate.

vice offers a range of support to young people between the ages
of 14 and 24 years, including engagement and retention in work
or education, recreational involvement, peer and psychological
support to foster resilience, as well as other well-being activities to
promote good mental and physical health. Evaluation of such pro­
grams is now required to carefully quantify and measure the range
of direct and indirect outcomes that they could achieve.
In light of these considerations, we recommend that mental
health be measured as a standard outcome in the evaluation of any
policy, programme or intervention targeting social determinants.
Although this requires additional data collection in the context of
evaluations that may have quite separate aims, including mental
health alongside other outcomes is becoming increasingly feasible
with innovations such as computerized adaptive testing442, passive
sensing technology, and administrative record linkage443. Fur­
thermore, the value of such information would greatly enhance
our understanding of which approaches are most effective for ad­
dressing social determinants, and which could facilitate real prog­
ress in improving population health in parallel with other social
outcomes (e.g., crime, education, employment, welfare).

2. Invest in interventions that pay off in multiple domains
Most, if not all, of the social determinants discussed in this pa­
per are associated with adverse outcomes that extend beyond the
realm of mental health. As an example, experience of childhood
adversity – a risk factor strongly associated with a range of negative
mental health outcomes – is also associated with a host of poor
physical health103, social438, and educational/occupational439 out­
comes. In a second example, whole communities are often ex­
posed to highly intersectional, cyclical patterns of social disadvan­
tage2,138,374, meaning that successive generations of families may
face limited choices in navigating social determinants of health,
including socioeconomic disadvantage, social exclusion, discrim­
ination, trauma, and hostile environments, which simultaneously
contribute to poor physical health, mental health, and social out­
comes41,45. However, despite substantial evidence supporting such
multi-finality, progress in addressing social determinants and their
associated consequences has been slow, due in part to the perva­
sive siloed thinking amongst researchers, practitioners and policy
makers.
Greater cross-sector collaboration and more inclusive outcome
measures may help advance prevention efforts, particularly where
these include approaches aimed at whole populations. At present,
many promising interventions that target social determinants are
not assessed in terms of mental health effects, which represents
a lost opportunity to learn about their potential individual-, com­
munity-, and society-level impacts440. For example, there are a
wide range of innovative approaches being implemented within
the education, social care and criminal justice sectors that may
be beneficial for mental health but are not currently recognized
as such due to an absence of formalized measurement of mental
health outcomes. One exemplar approach is that of the Uptown
Hub in New York441, which provides a community-based service
for youth at risk of involvement with the judicial system. The ser­

78

3. Invest in interventions that target critical windows of
the life course to interrupt intergenerational transmission
of mental health inequalities
Although the majority of mental disorders manifest during ad­
olescence19, they are often rooted much earlier in development.
A life course perspective can help us understand how exposure
to various social determinants – that operate from before birth
throughout life – affects one’s chances of experiencing poor (or
good) mental health444, or how it may perpetuate these outcomes
through intergenerational transmission within families or com­
munities445. By taking a life course approach, we can potentially
develop effective interventions that interrupt the intergenerational
transmission of accumulated adversities during critical windows
of vulnerability446.
Given the importance of the prenatal period in shaping men­
tal, physical and cognitive trajectories, providing good-quality and
accessible parental and familial support early in life is essential
to affect this process367. Earlier, we presented evidence of posi­
tive outcomes following early-life home visitation programs for
pregnant and post-partum mothers, with benefits extending into
childhood and adolescence, and huge cost savings371,373. These in­
terventions are particularly effective in selective groups. Ensuring
that young families have sufficient financial support to alleviate
stress and meet their needs, including adequate food and housing
security, also warrants targeting direct economic interventions
at selective groups during critical periods of child development.
Stable, secure relationships, particularly in the early years of life,
appear fundamental to buffer against life stressors, meaning that
family-based interventions hold enormous potential for mental
health prevention and breaking intergeneration cycles of disad­
vantage.
Interventions that support stable, secure and cohesive commu­

World Psychiatry 23:1 - February 2024

nities in the wider social environment may also help buffer chil­
dren from the impact of social adversity on mental health281. For
young people, educational settings are likely to be particularly
relevant environments in which to implement interventions that
promote life-long mental health. For example, schools can nurture
socioemotional, academic and cognitive skills, which can bolster
against future disadvantages (e.g., unemployment). This could
lead to improved educational attainment and increased socio­
economic status to disrupt intergenerational cycles of exposure to
some social adversities that increase risk of mental health prob­
lems. Further, the onset of many mental health problems occurs
during the transition from adolescence to adulthood, a point at
which the stakes are high for achieving socio-developmental mile­
stones. Preventing onset in this period could have a profound im­
pact on future social and economic trajectories447.
We have also seen how some neighbourhood environments
can act as reservoirs for structural racism and discrimination that
increases the likelihood of exposure to individual-level stressors448.
Systemic underinvestment, disenfranchisement and lack of op­
portunities in such neighbourhoods restrict upward social mobil­
ity, and so these experiences – including deleterious mental health
outcomes – become highly intractable, intergenerational and sys­
temic forms of disadvantage and oppression. Effective public men­
tal health interventions must create opportunities to break these
cycles of exposure within our communities, with evidence that this
may be particularly important early in life449.

4. Prioritize interventions that focus on poverty alleviation
Any comprehensive public health approach to reducing the bur­den of poor mental health must include a focus on poverty allevia­
tion. Poverty is inextricably linked to most social determinants of
mental health, and could be considered a root cause. It is incum­
bent on all stakeholders in the public health sphere to advocate for
poverty alleviation in order to mitigate its deleterious, multi-final
effects. In addition to improving population mental health, reduc­
ing poverty would make major contributions towards improving
population physical health, reducing societal inequalities, and re­
ducing barriers to social justice, thus connecting with other recom­­­
mendations we outline here.
Poverty has particularly pernicious effects early in life, with con­sequences that stretch across the life course. Children who grow
up in poverty tend to live dramatically different lives compared
with those who do not. This begins with their immediate environ­
ment, as children in poverty are more likely to be living in crowded
and/or poor-quality housing, and to be exposed to food insecurity
and pollution450. Poverty also has strong effects on their parents,
as the stress of living in poverty affects parental well-being, and in­
troduces conflicts that negatively influence parenting behaviours
and the strength of the parent-child relationship450,451. Worse,
poverty is strongly and consistently linked with child maltreat­
ment and neglect451. Children living in poverty are more likely to
be exposed to violence, either in their homes or in the communi­
ties where they live450.

World Psychiatry 23:1 - February 2024

The adversity faced by children in poverty leaves them less pre­
pared for school, as they rate lower on numerous aspects of read­
iness at school entry age, including social and behavioural skills,
language development, and cognitive abilities452,453. This results in
a socio-developmental cascade with long-lasting impacts, as chil­
dren who grow up in low-income families are less likely to achieve
academically through all levels of schooling, and are more likely
to leave school early, or with lower qualifications452,454. Although
they are more likely to enter the labour market early, they have
lower incomes throughout adulthood454. Beyond educational and
economic outcomes, living in poverty also influences the social
lives of those experiencing it. Low income also limits individu­
als’ capacity to engage in social, leisure and civic activities, leav­
ing them less able to mitigate stressful experiences via larger social
networks and increased social support and capital455.
Given the numerous pathways through which poverty influ­
ences social determinants of mental health, only some of which
are mentioned here, efforts to alleviate poverty should result in
mental health benefits. Any public health campaign to improve
population mental health that does not address poverty will be
unlikely to meet its goal.

5. Strengthen causal inference in research on social
determinants of mental health and primary prevention
We have sought to identify the strongest evidence regarding
those social factors that contribute most substantially to popula­
tion-level mental health and disorder, and single out which pub­
lic health interventions are most likely to prevent adverse mental
health. While high-quality RCT and/or longitudinal evidence is
available in some domains, there is still much to learn about the
causal pathways between social determinants and mental health.
One common and emergent theme in our review is the extent
to which these associations arise from non-causal mechanisms
such as genetic selection or unobserved confounding. Effective pre­
vention strategies that target social determinants will only improve
population mental health if those determinants induce a change
in the outcome under study (i.e., they have a causal effect on the
outcome). Proponents of biological determinism argue that near­
ly all socially-constructed “exposures” result from the selection
of people with greater genetic vulnerabilities to mental disorders
into more adverse social environments456. Thus, under this par­
adigm, social adversities are – like mental ill health – seen as just
another consequence of genetic influences. However, while ge­
netic selection may contribute to social patterns of disease occur­
rence457, neither genetic nor environmental factors alone will
be sufficient or necessary in the aetiology of mental disorders.
More research is required to understand the myriad of causal sets
that lead to psychiatric disorder, and their relative impacts at the
population level. Here, we propose that modern causal inference
methods458 should become de rigueur when using observational
data to investigate the social determinants of mental health. Fur­
ther, these methods are only as strong as the underlying measures,
samples and assumptions upon which they are predicated, so ac­

79

celerating the use of longitudinal, well-characterized and epide­
miological representative samples – and synthesizing expertise
and data from across academia, psychiatry and industry – should
be a priority to make substantial progress in identifying the social
causes on which to intervene.
Our review also raises the need to avoid social reductionism.
Many social factors – operating from proximal to distal ranges – are
likely to contribute to cyclical disadvantage, structural discrimina­
tion and mental health. We may worry less about which specific
cause (e.g., which type of abuse or neglect, which domain of depri­
vation or inequality) is the determinant of risk, but rather focus on
identifying the causal structure through which risk manifests itself,
and across which holistic interventions are required. Adopting a
causal architecture framework459 and grounding our research in
theoretical models of causation would accelerate understanding
of how, where and when to intervene effectively.
Finally, many systematic reviews of interventions in this paper
were caveated by observations around low quality, small samples
and heterogeneous methodologies, while very few RCTs of com­
plex social interventions have been attempted. Arguably, the fund­
ing landscape around these issues needs transformation. Many
small, low-quality observational studies hamper the synthesis of
reliable evidence on what works for whom460. Larger, ambitious,
interdisciplinary and multisectoral collaborations that attempt
to tackle a big idea through the triangulation of high-quality evi­
dence, including experimental paradigms – although more dif­
ficult, costly and risky – could help transform our understanding
of primary prevention strategies that improve population health
across multiple domains.

6. Establish inclusive longitudinal population mental
health monitoring
Psychiatry has a long-held fascination with the determinants of
mental health across disorders and dimensions that still rely upon
phenomenological interpretation. This is true for both clinical psy­
chiatry and psychiatric epidemiology. But the cornerstone of both
approaches is the need to count. Accurately monitoring the inci­
dence and prevalence of mental disorders, as well as the distribu­
tion of underlying symptomatology, in the population over time,
serves at least two crucial purposes. First, it establishes the basic
need for clinical treatment in a population, upon which appropri­
ate resourcing can be set for secondary and tertiary prevention.
Second, it allows empirical quantification of the potential gains
in population mental health that could be achieved through the
effective deployment of universal, selective and indicated primary
prevention strategies.
Many countries struggle with basic monitoring of the burden of
psychiatric morbidities in their populations461, which inhibits both
clinical and public mental health provision. In LMIC settings, the
reasons for this may be self-evident, since limited resources may
mean political prioritization of other vital issues. Recent reviews
have highlighted the evidence gap in incidence and prevalence es­
timates of psychiatric disorders between HIC and LMIC settings462.

80

In HIC settings, the lack of routine data on psychiatric morbidity in
the population is sometimes surprising. In England, for example,
while the National Health System collects routine mental health
service contact data for planning purposes, it is difficult to obtain
reliable estimates of incidence and prevalence from help-seeking
samples that often lack validated assessment data about psycho­
pathology. Even in countries with well-established disease reg­
istries, such as Denmark, Sweden or Finland, incidence is based
on contact with secondary mental health care services, and may
therefore be less useful for some psychiatric conditions, including
depression and anxiety. Prevalence estimates from survey data,
while more population-based, are often drawn from smaller sam­
ples, which limits inferences that can be made about psychiatric
morbidity in different subgroups. Finally, all methods of popula­
tion mental health monitoring will suffer to a greater or lesser ex­
tent from unrepresentative sampling, whether due to biases in case
detection or help-seeking.
In order to respond effectively across primary, secondary and
tertiary levels of prevention, modern paradigms for reliable, in­
clusive and precise longitudinal monitoring of population mental
health at scale are needed. In the context of social determinants,
it is particularly vital that these include representative and wellpowered samples from socially disadvantaged and minoritized
backgrounds. In many contexts this could be achieved by better
routine recording of mental health data and the use of harmo­
nized data management platforms that harness technological ad­
vances in data security and linkage with clinical and population
health data, of which some examples already exist463.

7. Ensure parity between primary, secondary and tertiary
prevention in mental health
The need for primary prevention in mental health should be ex­
amined closely by policy makers worldwide. The advantages of this
prevention are evident in terms of improving quality of life, social
functioning and workforce participation, and reducing suicides.
Such approaches have been outlined in this paper, and encompass
creating environments where people (particularly members of
marginalized groups) know where to access early support after an
adverse life event or when facing chronic difficulties, have oppor­
tunities for social connectedness, and are supported to function
optimally in their work, family and social roles. As an overarching
principle, it is also important to address the reduced uptake of in­
terventions among socially disadvantaged groups464. Beyond this,
the ultimate societal ambition is to achieve primordial prevention,
i.e. to prevent the emergence of risk factors for mental disorders
and suicidality. Responsibility for this lies outside the remit of pub­
lic health, and relies on societal systems that engender the socio­
economic and cultural conditions that promote mental health and
well-being in a population.
There are also strong reasons why investment in primary pre­
vention of mental ill health should have parity with that in sec­
ondary and tertiary prevention. The social determinants we have
outlined above generally contribute to the onset, severity and

World Psychiatry 23:1 - February 2024

prognosis of mental disorders. Therefore, any efforts to arrest the
progression of mental disorders (implemented as secondary and
tertiary prevention) will falter where the conditions needed for
primary prevention do not exist.

10.
11.
12.
13.

CONCLUSIONS
In this review, we have highlighted the major social determi­
nants that generate and sustain intergenerational inequalities in
risk and maintenance of mental health problems and disorders.
Although stronger causal evidence is required for some determi­
nants, we have shown that a variety of primary prevention strate­
gies to alleviate social inequalities, which often have their origins
in early life, can be effective in reducing the population burden
of potentially life-long mental health problems that will typically
emerge in adolescence.
Various forms of discrimination and minoritization, including
structural racism, are likely to exacerbate intergenerational social
inequalities in mental health. We have outlined seven recommen­
dations aligned around social justice that policy makers, practi­
tioners and clinicians are invited to adopt to advance efforts to in­
tervene on modifiable social determinants that place populations
in peril of poor mental health.